Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, my guest is Dr. David Sinclair,
professor of genetics at Harvard Medical School
and co-director of the Paul F. Glenn Center
for the Biology of Aging.
Dr. Sinclair's work is focused on why we age
and how to slow or reverse the effects of aging
by focusing on the cellular and molecular pathways
that exist in all cells of the body
and that progress those cells over time
from young cells to old cells.
By elucidating the biology of cellular maturation and aging,
Dr. Sinclair's group has figured out intervention points
by which any of us, indeed all of us,
can slow or reverse the effects of aging.
What is unique about his work
is that it focuses on behavioral interventions,
nutritional interventions,
as well as supplementation and prescription drug
interventions that can help us all age more slowly
and reverse the effects of aging in all tissues of the body.
Dr. Sinclair holds a unique and revolutionary view
of the aging process,
which is that aging is not the normal and natural consequence
that we all will suffer,
but rather that aging is a disease
that can be slowed or halted.
Dr. Sinclair continually publishes
original research articles
in the most prestigious and competitive scientific journals.
In addition to that,
he's published a popular book
that was a New York Times bestseller.
The title of that book is a lifespan,
why we age and why we don't have to.
He is also very active in public facing efforts
to educate people on the biology of aging
and slowing the aging process.
Dr. Sinclair and I share a mutual interest and excitement
in public education about science.
And so I'm thrilled to share with you that we've partnered
and Dr. David Sinclair is going to be launching
the lifespan podcast,
which is all about the biology of aging
and tools to intervene in the aging process.
That podcast will launch Wednesday, January 5th.
You can find it at the link in the show notes
to this episode today as well.
You can subscribe to that podcast on YouTube,
Apple or Spotify or anywhere that you get your podcasts.
Again, the lifespan podcast featuring Dr. David Sinclair
begins Wednesday, January 5th, 2022.
Be sure to check it out.
You're going to learn a tremendous amount of information
and you're going to learn both the mechanistic science
behind aging, the mechanistic science
behind reversing the aging process
and practical tools that you can apply
in your everyday life.
In today's episode, Dr. Sinclair and I talk about
the biology of aging and tools to intervene in that process.
And so you might view today's episode
as a primer for the lifespan podcast
because we delve deep into the behavioral tools,
nutritional aspects, supplementation aspects
of the biology of aging.
We also talk about David's important discoveries
of the sirtuins, particular molecular components
that influence what is called the epigenome.
And if you don't know what the epigenome is,
you will soon learn in today's episode.
Coming away from today's episode,
you will have in-depth knowledge about the biology of aging
at the cellular, molecular and what we call
the circuit level, meaning how the different organs
and tissues of the bodies age independently
and how they influence the aging of each other.
Today's episode gets into discussion
about many aspects of aging and tools to combat aging
that have not been discussed on any other podcasts
or in the book lifespan.
Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.
It is however, part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information about science
and science related tools to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Roca.
Roca makes eyeglasses and sunglasses
that are the absolute highest quality.
I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system.
I can tell you that the visual system has to contend
with a number of different challenges,
such as when you move from a bright area outside
to an area where there are shadows,
you have to adjust a number of things in your visual system
so that you can still see things clearly.
One problem with a lot of eyeglasses and sunglasses
is they don't take that biological feature into account
and you have to take off your glasses and put them back on
depending on how bright or dim a given environment is.
With Roca eyeglasses and sunglasses,
you always see things with the utmost clarity.
In addition, they're very lightweight
and they won't slip off your face.
In fact, they were designed to be worn while biking
or running and in various activities,
but they also have a terrific aesthetic
so you could wear them to dinner or work.
I wear readers at night and when I drive
and I wear the sunglasses for most of the day.
If you'd like to try Roca sunglasses or eyeglasses,
you can go to roca.com, that's R-O-K-A.com
and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off
your first order.
Again, that's Roca, R-O-K-A.com
and enter the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Inside Tracker.
Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done
for the simple reason that many of the factors
that impact your immediate and long-term health
can only be assessed from a quality blood test.
And now with the advent of modern DNA tests,
you can also get a clear picture
of what your biological age is
and compare that to your chronological age.
And obviously your biological age is the important one
because it predicts how long you will live
and it's the one that you can control.
The great thing about Inside Tracker
is that compared to a lot of other DNA tests
and blood tests out there,
is that with Inside Tracker,
you don't just get your numbers back
at the levels of various hormones, metabolic factors,
blood lipids, et cetera,
but it also offers clear directives to lifestyle factors,
nutritional factors, and supplementation
that you can use in order to get the numbers
into the ranges that are best for you and for your health.
If you'd like to try Inside Tracker,
you can go to insidetracker.com slash Huberman
to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans.
Just use the code Huberman at checkout.
Again, that's insidetracker.com slash Huberman
to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Magic Spoon.
Magic Spoon is a zero sugar, grain-free,
keto-friendly cereal.
I don't follow a strictly ketogenic diet.
What works best for me is to eat according to my desire
to be alert at certain times of day
and to be sleepy at other times of day.
So for me, that means fasting until about 11 a.m.
or 12 noon most days.
And then my lunch is typically a low carb, keto-ish lunch,
maybe a small piece of grass-fed meat,
some salad, something of that sort.
And then in the afternoon,
I might have a snack that's also keto-ish.
And then at night is when I eat my carbohydrates,
which for me helps me with the transition to sleep
and allows me to get great deep sleep.
That's what works for me.
What that means is that in the afternoon,
I'm craving a snack and the snack for me is Magic Spoon.
What I do lately is I put in some Bulgarian yogurt.
Sometimes I just eat it straight.
Each serving of Magic Spoon has zero grams of sugar,
13 to 14 grams of protein,
and only four grams of carbohydrates in each serving.
So it really matches that low carb, keto-ish approach.
There's only 140 calories per serving
and they have a variety of flavors,
cocoa, fruity, peanut butter, frosted.
I particularly like frosted because it tastes like donuts.
I try not to eat donuts, but I do love the frosted.
And as I mentioned before,
I lately mix it with yogurt, put a little cinnamon on there.
I'm getting hungry just talking about it now.
If you want to try Magic Spoon,
you can go to magicspoon.com slash Huberman
to grab a variety pack.
Use the promo code Huberman at checkout
to get $5 off your order.
Again, that's magicspoon.com slash Huberman
and use the code Huberman to get $5 off.
And now my conversation with Dr. David Sinclair.
Thank you for coming.
Thanks for having me here.
It's good to see you.
This is Mate, by the way, that we're toasting at 11 AM.
Unlike other podcasts, well, I don't drink alcohol,
so I'm boring that way.
But truly, thanks for being here.
I have a ton of questions for you.
We go way back in some sense,
but that doesn't mean that I don't have many,
many questions about aging, longevity, lifespan,
actionable protocols to increase how long we live, et cetera.
And I just want to start off with a very simple question
that I'm not even sure there's an answer to,
but what is the difference between longevity,
anti-aging and aging as a disease?
Because I associate you with the statement,
aging is a disease.
Right, well, so longevity is the more academic way
we describe what we research.
Anti-aging is kind of the same thing,
but it's got a bad rap because it's been used
by a whole bunch of people
that don't know what they're talking about.
So I really don't like that term anti-aging,
but aging as a disease and longevity
are perfectly valid ways to talk about this subject.
So let's talk about aging as a disease.
When I started my research,
disease here at Harvard Medical School,
it was considered if there's something
that's wrong with you and it's a rare thing,
has to be less than 50% of the population,
that's definitely a disease.
And then people work their whole lives
to try and cure that condition.
And so I looked up what's the definition of aging
and it says, well, it's a deterioration
and in health and sickness and you can die from it,
typically you do.
Something that sounds pretty much like a disease,
but the caveat is that if more than half the population
gets this condition, aging,
it's put in a different bucket,
which is first of all, that's outrageous
because it's just a totally arbitrary cutoff.
But think about this,
that we're ignoring the major cause of all these diseases.
Aging is 80 to 90% the cause of heart disease, Alzheimer's.
If we didn't get old and our bodies stayed youthful,
we would not get those diseases.
And actually what we're showing in my labels,
if you turn the clock back in tissues,
those diseases go away.
So aging is the problem.
And instead through most of the last 200 years,
we've been sticking band-aids on diseases
that have already occurred because of aging
and then it's too late.
So there are a couple of things.
One is we want to slow aging down
so we don't get those diseases.
And when they do occur, don't just stick a band-aid on,
reverse the age of the body
and then the diseases will go away.
That clarifies a lot for me, thank you.
Can we point to one specific general phenomenon in the body
that underlies aging?
Yeah, well, that's contentious
because scientists like to come up with new hypotheses.
It's how they build their careers.
But fortunately during the 2000s,
we settled on eight or nine major causes of aging.
We called them hallmarks
because causes was a little bit too strong.
But these eight or nine causes,
at least for the first time,
allowed us to come around and talk together.
We put them on a pizza
so everyone got an equal weighting, equal slices.
But before that, by the way,
we were trying to kill each other in the field.
It was horrible.
Interesting that you guys work on aging
and you're trying to kill each other.
Yeah, isn't it?
Well, kill each other's careers.
I mean, I like to think I was fairly generous,
but I was one of the kids
and the old guard really didn't like the new guard.
We just came along in the 1990s and 90s
and said free radicals don't do much.
There were actually genes called longevity genes
and that caused a whole ruckus.
And there was this competition for what never happened,
which was a Nobel Prize for this.
And it just led to a lot of competition.
I would go to meetings
and people would shout at each other and backstab.
It was horrible.
But then fortunately in the 2000s,
we rallied around this new map of aging
with these causes or hallmarks.
But I think that there's one slice of the pizza
that is way larger than the others.
And we can get to that,
but that's the information in the cell
that we call the epigenome.
Well, tell us a little bit more about the epigenome.
Frame it for us, if you will.
And then we'll get into ways
that one can adjust the epigenome in positive ways.
Yeah, so in science, what I like to do,
I'm a reductionist, is to boil it down.
And I actually ended up boiling aging down to an equation,
which is the loss of information due to entropy.
It's a hard thing to overcome
the second law of thermodynamics, that's fair.
But this equation really represents the fact
that I think aging is a loss of information
in the same way that when you Xerox something
a thousand times, you'll lose that information,
or you try to copy a cassette tape,
or even if you send information across the internet,
some of it will get lost.
That's what I think is aging.
And there are two types of information in the body.
There is the genetic information, which is digital,
ATCG, the chemical letters of DNA.
But there's this other part of the information in the body
that's just as important.
It's essential, in fact.
And that's the systems that control
which genes are switched on and off,
in what cell, at what time,
in response to what we eat, et cetera.
And it turns out that 80% of our future longevity
and health is controlled by this second part,
the epigenetic information, the control systems.
I liken the DNA to the music that's on a DVD
or a compact disc.
For the younger people, we used to use these things.
I recall.
Yep.
And then the epigenome is the reader that says,
okay, in this cell, we need to play that set of songs.
And in this other cell,
we have to play a different set of songs.
But over time, aging is the equivalent
of scratching the CD and the DVD
so that you're not playing the right songs.
And cells, when they don't hear the right songs,
they get messed up and they don't function well.
And that is what I'm saying is the main driver of aging.
And these other hallmarks
are largely manifestations of that process.
Can we go a little deeper into what these scratches are?
Is it the way that the DNA are packed into a cell?
Is it the way that they're spaced?
What are the scratches that you're referring to?
So DNA is six foot long.
If you join your chromosomes together,
you get about six foot per cell.
So there's enough to go to the moon
and back eight times in your body.
And it has to be wrapped up to exist inside us.
But it's not just wrapped up willy-nilly.
It's not just a bundle of string.
It's wrapped up very carefully in ways
that dictates which genes are switched on and off.
And when we're developing in the embryo,
the cell marks the DNA with chemicals that says,
okay, this gene is for a nerve cell.
You, you cell, will stay a nerve cell
for the next hundred years, if you're lucky.
Don't turn into a skin cell.
That would be bad.
And those chemicals,
there are many different types of chemicals,
but one's called methylation.
Those little methyls will mark which songs get played
for the rest of your life.
And there are other marks that change daily.
But in total, what we're saying is that
the body controls the genome through the ability
to mark the DNA and then compact some parts of it,
silence those genes, don't read those genes,
and open others, keep others open that should stay open.
And that pattern of genes that are silent and open,
silent open, is what dictates the cell's type,
the cell's function.
And then the scratches are the disruption of that.
So genes that were once silent,
and you could say it's a gene that is involved in skin,
it's starting to come on in the brain,
shouldn't be there, but we see this happen,
and vice versa, the gene might get shut off
over time during aging.
Cells over time lose these structures,
lose their identity,
they forget what they're supposed to do,
and we get diseases.
We call that aging, and we can measure that.
In fact, we can measure it in such a way
that we can predict when somebody's going to die
based on the changes in those chemicals.
Are these changes the same sorts of changes
that underlie the outward body surface manifestations
of aging that most of us are familiar with?
Graying of the hair, wrinkling of the skin,
drooping of the face.
Walking around New York lately, it's amazing to me,
there are certain people that seem to walk
looking down at the sidewalk
because their spine is essentially in a C-shape, right?
A hallmark, if you will,
of aging that most of us are familiar with.
Are these same sorts of DNA scratches associated with that,
or are we talking about people
that potentially are going to look older,
but simply live longer?
Well, it's actually, you are as old as you look
if you want to generalize.
So let's start with centenarian families.
These are families that tend to live over 100.
When they're 70, they still look 50 or less.
So it is a good indicator.
It's not perfect because you can,
like me, grow up in Australia
and accelerate the aging of your skin,
but in general, how you look.
No one's ever died from gray hair,
but overall, you can get a sense
just from the ability of skin to hold itself up,
how thin it is, the number of wrinkles.
That is actually, a great paper just came out
that said that an AI system looking at the face
could very accurately predict someone's age.
Very interesting.
So I started off in developmental neurobiology.
So one of the things that I learned early on
that I still believe wholeheartedly
is that development doesn't stop at age 12 or 15,
or even 25, that your entire life
is one long developmental arc, right?
So in thinking about different portions
of that developmental arc,
the early portion of infancy and especially puberty
seem like especially rapid stages of aging.
And I know we normally look at babies and children
and kids in puberty and we think,
oh, they're so vital, they're so young.
And yet the way you describe these changes in the epigenome
and the way you have framed aging as a disease
leads me to ask, are periods of immense vitality,
the same periods when we're aging faster?
Yes, yes, and this is something I've never talked about,
at least not publicly, so this is a really good question.
So those chemicals we can measure,
it's also known as the Horvath clock,
it's the biological clock,
it's separate from your chronological age.
So actually what I didn't mention is that
when the AI looked at the faces of those people,
they could predict their biological age, their internal age.
So your skin represents the age of your organs as well.
And the people that look after themselves,
we can talk about how to do that later,
but there are some people that are 10, 20 years younger
than other people biologically.
And it turns out if you measure that clock from birth
or even before birth, if you look at animals,
there's a massive increase in age
based on that clock early in life.
So you're right, so that's a really important point
that you have accelerated aging
during the first few years of life,
and then it goes linear towards the rest of your life.
But there's another interesting thing you brought up,
which is that we're finding that the genes
that get messed up, that get scratched,
that are leading to aging
are those early developmental genes.
They come on late in life and just mess up the system,
and they seem to be particularly susceptible
to those scratches.
So what's causing the scratches?
Well, we know of a couple of things in my lab,
we figured out one is broken chromosomes, DNA damage,
particularly cuts to the DNA breaks.
So if you have an X-ray or a cosmic ray,
or even if you go out in the sun
and you'll get your broken chromosomes,
that accelerates the unwinding
of those beautiful DNA loops that I mentioned.
We can actually do this to a mouse.
We can accelerate that process,
and we get an old mouse, 50% older,
and it has this bent spine kyphosis,
it has gray hair, its organs are old.
So we now can control aging in the forwards direction.
The other thing that accelerates aging
is massive cell damage or stress.
So we pinched nerves,
and we saw that their aging process
was accelerated as well.
Incredible.
Yeah, this is more of an anecdotal phenomenon.
It is an anecdotal phenomenon,
but this experience of in junior high school,
you know, going home for a summer and you come back,
high school in the US usually starts eighth or ninth grade
or grade eight or grade nine for your Canadians.
And then some of the kids,
like they grew beards over the summer,
or they completely matured quickly over the summer.
Do you think there's any reason to believe
that rates of entry into and through puberty
can predict overall rates of aging?
In other words, if a kid is a slow burner, right?
They basically acquire the traits of puberty
slowly over many years.
Can we make some course prediction
that they are going to live a long time
versus a kid that goes home for the summer
and comes back a completely different organism
or appearing to be a completely different organism?
Like they basically age very quickly in the summer.
Does that mean they're aging very quickly overall?
Well, yeah, I don't want to scare anybody.
Sure.
There are studies that show that
the slower you take to develop,
it also is predictive of having a longer, healthier life.
And it may have something to do with growth hormone.
We know that growth hormone is pro-aging.
Anyone who's taking growth hormone, pay attention.
We notice, look at someone who's taking growth hormone.
They often will acquire these characteristics of vitality,
like improved smoothness of skin,
but their whole body shape changes.
Yeah, I mean, you'll feel better for a short amount of time.
You'll build up muscle, you'll feel great,
but it's like burning your candle at both ends.
Ultimately, if you want to live longer,
you want less of that.
And the animals that have been generated
and mutants that have low growth hormone,
sometimes these are dwarfs,
they live the longest by far.
A guy in my lab, Michael Bonkowski,
he had the longest lived mouse.
A mouse typically lives about two and a bit years.
He had a mouse that lived five years
and he gave it caloric restrictions for fasting
combined with one of these dwarf mutations,
low growth hormone.
I think he called it Yoda.
But you look at who lives the longest,
it's the really small people.
This is a bit anecdotal,
but it sounds like it might be true
is that the people who played the Munchkins
in the Wizard of Oz,
many of them went on to live into their 90s and beyond.
Really? Yeah.
Amazing.
Oh, there are some Laurent dwarfs as well.
There are dwarf mutations in South America
and they seem to be protected
against many of the diseases of aging.
You barely ever see heart disease
or cancer in these families.
So I, having owned a very large dog breed,
a Bulldog Mastiff who lived a long life
for a bulldog, 11 years,
but there are many dogs that will live 12, 16 years
that are smaller dogs.
Can we say that there's a direct relationship
between body size and longevity
or duration of life?
Well, there is,
but that doesn't mean that you're a slave
to your early epigenome,
nor to your genome.
The good news is that the epigenome can change.
Those loops and structures can be modified
by how you live your life.
And so if you're born tall and I wasn't,
and I wished at the time I did grow,
but no matter what size you are,
you can have a bigger impact on your life
than anything your genes give you.
80% is epigenetic, not genetic.
So let's talk about some of the things that people can do.
And I've kind of batched these into categories
rather than just diving right into actionable protocols.
So the first one relates to food, blood sugar, insulin.
This is something I hear a lot about
that fasting is good for us,
but rarely do I hear why it's good for us.
One of the reasons I'm excited to talk to you today
is because I want to drill into the details of this,
because I think understanding the mechanism
will allow people to make better choices
and not simply to just decide
whether or not they're going to fast or not fast
or how long they're going to fast,
I think should be dictated
by some understanding of the mechanism.
So why is it that having elevated blood sugar,
glucose, and insulin ages us more quickly?
And or why is it that having periods of time each day
or perhaps longer can extend our lifespan?
Well, let's start with what I think was a big mistake
was the idea that people should never be hungry.
We live in a world now
where there's at least three meals a day,
and then we've got companies selling bars
and snacks in between.
So the feeling of hunger,
some people never experience hunger in their whole lives.
It's really, really bad for them.
It was based, I believe, on the 20th century view
that you don't want to stress out the pancreas
and you try to keep insulin levels pretty steady
and not have this fluctuation.
What we actually found, my colleagues and I,
across this field of longevity
is that when you look at, first of all, animals,
whether it's a dog or a mouse or a monkey,
the ones that live the longest, by far, 30% longer
and stay healthy are the ones that don't eat all the time.
It actually was first discovered
back in the early 20th century, but people ignored it.
And then it was rediscovered in the 1930s.
Clive McKay did caloric restriction.
He put cellulose in the food of rats
so they couldn't get as many calories even though they ate,
and those rats lived 30% longer.
But then it went away, and then it came back in the 2000s
in a big way when a couple of things happened.
One is that my lab and others showed
that there are longevity genes in the body
that come on and protect us from aging and disease.
The group of genes that I work on are called sirtuins.
There's seven of them.
And we showed in 2005 in a science paper
that if you have low levels of insulin
and another molecule called insulin-like growth factor,
those low levels turn on the longevity genes.
One of them that's really important is called SIRT1.
But by having high levels of insulin all day,
being fed means your longevity genes are not switched on.
So you're falling apart.
Your epigenome, your information
that keeps your cells functioning over time
just degrades quickly.
Your clock is ticking faster by always being fed.
The other thing that I think might be happening
by always having food around
is that it's not allowing the cell to have periods of rest
and reestablish the epigenome.
And so it also is accelerating in that direction.
There's plenty of other reasons as well
that are not as profound,
such as having low levels of glucose in your body
will trigger your major muscles in your brain
to become more sensitive to insulin
and suck the glucose out of your bloodstream,
which is very good.
You don't want to have glucose flowing around too much.
And that will ward off type 2 diabetes.
So hunger, of course, is associated with low blood glucose
and low insulin.
Do you think there's anything
about the subjective experience of hunger itself
that could be beneficial for longevity?
Yeah, I do.
Though you get used to the feeling of not eating.
So I'm kind of screwed that way.
It's like cold water.
You eventually adapt.
You get used to it, unfortunately.
But there are some studies that are being done
at the National Institutes of Health
that are able to simulate the effect of hunger,
but still provide the calories.
And it's looking like there's a small component
that's due to hunger.
But most of it, actually,
is because you've got these periods of not being fed
and then the body turns on these defensive genes.
There's a really interesting experiment
that was published maybe a couple of years ago
by Rafael de Carbo down at the NIH.
What he did was he took over 10,000 mice
and gave them different combinations
of fat, carbohydrate, protein.
And he was trying to figure out what was the best combination.
And then he also cleverly had a group,
well, two groups, one that was fed all the time,
or ate as much as they wanted,
and the other group was only given food for an hour a day.
And it turns out they ate
roughly the same amount of calories.
Because, of course, in an hour,
they're stuffing their faces.
It turns out it didn't matter what diet he gave them.
It was only the group that ate within that window
that lived longer and dramatically longer.
So my conclusion is,
and mice are very similar to us metabolically,
I think that tells us that it's not as important
what you eat, it's when you eat during the day.
What is the protocol that people can extrapolate from that?
Or maybe I should just ask you,
what is your protocol for when to eat
and when to avoid food?
Do you fast, do you ever fast longer than 24 hours?
What do you do?
And what do you think is a good jumping off place
if people want to explore this as a protocol?
Well, if there's one thing I could say,
if I would say definitely try to skip a meal a day,
that's the best thing.
Does it matter which meal?
Or are they essentially equivalent?
Well, as long as it's at the end
or the beginning of the day,
because then you add that to the sleep period
where you're hopefully not eating.
I think that that's an excellent point.
I realize it's a simple one,
but I think it's an excellent one
because I think one of the things
that people struggle with the most
is knowing when and how to initiate
this so-called intermittent fasting.
And the middle of the day obviously
is not tacked to the sleep cycle in the same way.
So it's much harder as well for many people.
Yeah. Yeah.
Well, I'll tell you what I do.
I skip breakfast.
I have a tiny bit of yogurt or olive oil
because the supplements I have need to be dissolved in it.
And then I go throughout the whole day
as I'm doing right now here with this glass of water here.
I'm just keeping myself filled with liquids.
And so I don't feel hungry.
Beware that the first two to three weeks
when you try that, you will feel hungry.
And you also have a habit of wanting to chew on something.
There's a lot of physical parts to it,
but try to make it through the first three weeks
and do without breakfast or do without dinner.
And you'll get through it.
And I did that for most of my life actually,
mainly because I wasn't hungry in the morning.
Some people are very hungry in the morning
and they may want to consider skipping dinner instead.
But I will go throughout the whole day.
I don't get the crashes of the high glucose
and the low glucose.
Anyone who goes, oh man, it's three o'clock.
I'm gonna need a sleep.
If you do what I do, you will not experience that anymore.
Because what my body does is it regulates
blood sugar levels naturally.
My liver is putting out glucose when it needs to
and it's very steady and gives me pure focus
throughout the day.
And I don't even have to think about lunch.
I'm just powering through.
At dinner, I love food as much as anybody.
So I will eat a regular, pretty healthy meal.
I'll try to eat mostly vegetables.
I can eat some fish, some shrimp.
I rarely will eat a steak.
In fact, my microbiome is so adapted to my diet.
Now, if I eat a steak, it will not get digested very well.
I'll feel terrible.
If I don't eat a steak, I feel terrible.
Well, we...
Argentine lineage.
Well, we can talk about that.
Well, everybody's different.
I mean, that's the other thing.
What works for me may not be perfect for you.
And we do have to measure things to know what's working.
I rarely eat dessert.
I gave up dessert and sugar when I turned 40.
And occasionally, I'll steal a bit of dessert
because it doesn't hurt if you steal it, right?
But other than that, I avoid sugar,
which includes simple carbohydrates, bread I try to avoid.
I've actually noticed, this is just a side note.
I used to get buildup of plaque pretty easily.
And every time I went to the dentist,
they'd have to scrape it off.
And I even bought tools to scrape it off
because it was driving me nuts.
I don't get plaque anymore.
And I think it's because of my diet.
I don't have those sugars in my mouth
that the bacteria feed on
and then form the biofilm on the teeth.
Much better breath, by the way.
That's a benefit.
So, do you ever fast longer than this?
It sounds like if you go to bed,
well, you tend to stay up late, I know,
because I get texts from you at like two in the morning,
my time, which means you're out very late
and up early as well.
But assuming that people go to sleep
sometime around 11, 30, or 12, plus or minus an hour,
and wake up sometime around 7 a.m.,
plus or minus 90 minutes,
you're eating more or less on a,
it sounds like some like 20 hours of fasting,
four hours of eating, or 16 hours of fasting,
eight hours of food intake, et cetera.
But do you ever do longer fasts,
like 48 hours or 72 hours or week-long fasts?
Occasionally I do.
So my typical day,
I would only eat within a two-hour window,
just usually I'm either eating out or-
So you're 22 too?
Yeah, yeah, but I love, well-
And if you exercise, do you feel like,
then you just power through and maintain that fasted state?
Absolutely, I can exercise.
And now my body's so used to it,
I don't feel like I need food after exercising.
I used to.
But have I gone longer?
Yes, but not very often.
I find it quite difficult to go more than 24 hours.
But when I do it, maybe it's once a month,
I'll go for two days.
After two, and actually even better,
if you go for three days without eating,
it kicks in even greater longevity benefits.
So there's a system called the autophagy system,
which digests old and misfolded proteins in the body.
And there's a natural cleansing
that happens when you're hungry.
Macro-autophagy, its name is.
But a good friend of mine, Anna Maria Cuervo
at Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
discovered a deep cleanse called the chaperone-mediated
autophagy, which kicks in day two, day three,
which really gets rid of the deep proteins.
And what excites me is she just put out a big paper
that said, if you trigger this process in an old mouse,
it lives 35% longer.
Wow.
Yeah, so it's a big deal.
If I could go longer, I would.
But I just find that with my lifestyle,
and I'm going always day 110%, I need to eat
at least once a day, unfortunately.
One more practical question
than a mechanistic question related to this.
The practical question is when you are fasting,
regardless of how long,
I know you're ingesting fluids like water
and presumably some caffeine.
I heard you had several or more espresso today,
which is impressive.
But are you also ingesting electrolytes?
Like I know some people get lightheaded,
they start to feel shaky when they fast,
and that the addition of sodium to their water
or potassium, magnesium is something
that's becoming a little more in vogue now.
Is that something that you do
or that you see a need for people to do?
Well, it makes sense, but I haven't had a need to do it.
So I don't, I just, I drink tea during the day
and coffee when I'm first awake and I don't get the shakes.
So, you know, I don't fix what's not broken.
And I do add things to my protocol
that I think will improve me
and avoid those things, of course, that won't.
But yeah, because I don't have a need for it, I don't try it.
But it does make sense,
especially if you've had a big night the night before,
you probably want to supplement with that.
But I think there's fair amount of good stuff
in tea and coffee as it is.
Okay, so then the mechanistic question is,
you've told us that there's ample evidence
that keeping your blood sugar low for a period of time,
each 24 hours, can help trigger some of these
pro-longevity anti-aging mechanisms
and that extending them out two or three days
can trigger yet additional mechanisms
of gobbling up of dead cells and things of that sort.
How is it that blood glucose triggers these mechanisms?
Because we've said, okay,
remove glucose and things get better.
You've talked before, maybe we could talk more now
about some of the underlying cellular
and genetic mechanisms, things like the sirtuins,
but how are glucose and the sirtuins
actually tethered to one another mechanistically?
Yeah, there's a really good question.
That proves you're a scientist or world leading on.
So what we now know is that these longevity pathways,
we call them, these longevity genes talk to each other.
And we used to say,
oh, my longevity gene's more important than yours.
It was ridiculous, because they're all talking to each other.
You pull one lever and the other one moves.
And the way to think of it is that there are systems set up
to detect what you're eating.
So the sirtuins will mainly respond to sugar and insulin.
And then there's this other system called mTOR,
which is sensing how much protein
or amino acids are coming into your body.
And they talk to each other.
We can pull one and affect the other and vice versa.
But together, when you're fasting,
you'll get the sirtuin activation, which is good for you.
And you'll also, through lack of amino acids,
particularly three of them, leucine, isoleucine, valine,
the body will downregulate mTOR.
And it's that up sirtuin, down mTOR
that is hugely beneficial
and turns on all of the body's defenses,
the chewing up the old proteins,
improving insulin sensitivity, giving us more energy,
repairing cells, all of that.
And so these two pathways,
I think are the most important for longevity.
So interesting.
You mentioned leucine.
Within the resistance training,
slash bodybuilding, slash fitness community,
leucine gets a lot of attention
because there are longstanding debates
about how much protein one needs per day
and how much one can assimilate at each meal.
It makes for many YouTube videos and not much else, frankly.
However, it's clear that because of leucine's effects
on the mTOR pathway, that there are many people,
not just people in these particular fitness communities
that are actively trying to ingest more leucine
on a regular basis
in order to maximize their wellness and fitness
and in some cases muscle growth, but also just wellness.
But what I interpret your last statement to mean
is that leucine, because it triggers cellular growth,
is actually pro-aging in some sense.
Is that right?
Well, it could be.
That's what the evidence suggests.
And again, it goes back to the debate, should you supplement
with growth hormone or testosterone,
all of these activities will give you immediate benefits.
You'll bulk up more, you'll feel better immediately.
But based on the research,
it's at the expense of long-term health.
So my view of longevity, the way I treat my body,
is I don't burn both candles.
I have one end of the candle lit.
I'm very careful, I don't blow on it.
But I also do enough exercise
that I'm building up my muscle, but I'm not huge.
Anyone who's seen me knows
that I'm not a professional bodybuilder.
But I tried to actually, here's the key,
and I haven't said this publicly that I can remember.
I pulse things so that I get periods of fasting
and then I eat, then I take a supplement,
then I fast, then I exercise.
And I'm taking the supplements and eating
in the right timing to allow me
to build up muscle sometimes.
Because you can't just expect to take something constantly
and do something constantly for it to work.
And that's why it's taken me about 15 years
to develop my protocol.
And there's a lot of subtlety to it.
Yeah, it sounds like a very rational protocol.
Does the name Ori Hofmeckler mean anything to you?
No.
Okay.
Just briefly, I discovered Ori Hofmeckler
about 15 years ago.
He was in Israeli special forces.
He's now got to be close to 70.
Forgive me, Ori, if that number is inflated.
He wrote a book called The Warrior Diet,
which got very little attention at the time.
But what he said was,
when he was in Israeli special forces,
they rarely ate more than once per day
and sometimes once every second or third day.
And this is a guy who maintains
an incredible physical stature.
You know, he's very lean, very strong,
and very vital at, you know,
I wouldn't say an advanced age,
but he's getting up there
and he just seems to be getting better and better.
Ori Hofmeckler was the person
who essentially founded, if you will,
although our ancestors founded, to be completely fair,
the so-called intermittent fasting diet.
He called it The Warrior Diet
and this book didn't get much attention.
But one of the things that you just said
really reminded me of Ori.
I sat down with him.
I actually went to his home and sat down with him
and he said, fasting is wonderful,
but these pulses where you nourish the body
or even slightly overnourish the body,
provided they aren't too frequent,
have a tremendous effect on vitality.
And so I want to use that as kind of a segue
to address this issue of vitality versus longevity,
because here you're telling me,
and certainly the evidence supports that, you know,
growth hormone will make you feel better and younger,
taking testosterone or estrogen, we should probably say.
There are, right,
women who take hormone therapies later in life
who take estrogen,
they experience a strong increase in vitality
if it's done correctly.
But there is an effect of aging the body more rapidly.
It's sort of a second puberty, if you will.
But this idea of restriction and then pulsing,
not necessarily feast and famine,
but certainly famine and feast in lowercase letters,
there really seems to be something about that.
So at a cellular level,
like we kind of go back to mTOR and the sirtuins,
how do you think that the cells might be reacting
to this kind of lowercase feast
and uppercase famine type protocol?
Right.
Well, the pulsing, I think,
is what you want to do is to get the cells
to be perceiving adversity, okay?
Because our modern life, we're sitting around,
we're eating too much, we're not exercising,
our cells respond.
They go, hey, everything's cool, no problem.
And they become relaxed
and they don't turn on their defenses and we age rapidly.
We can see it in the clock.
People who exercise and eat less
have a slower ticking clock.
It's a fact.
But my protocol is different than most people's
because I am pulsing it.
Now, first of all, let's get to why did I even think
that might be possible?
Because I didn't read the warrior diet.
What I found in my research was that
if we gave resveratrol, this red wine molecule
that became well-known in the 2000s,
if we gave it to mice, their whole lifespan,
they were protected against a high fat diet,
which we call the Western diet.
They had lean organs.
They lived slightly longer, but not a lot.
And if we gave them a high fat diet without resveratrol,
they actually lived a lot shorter.
So resveratrol protected them against the high fat diet.
We gave it to them on a normal diet.
They just ate it when they wanted
and there wasn't much effect.
This is what's not known,
though it's in the supplemental data of the paper
that nobody ever reads.
The mice that were given resveratrol every second day
on a normal diet lived dramatically longer
than any other group.
So people out there, you know, my critics say,
oh, resveratrol didn't extend the lifespan
of mice on a normal diet, therefore it's not aging.
It's just protecting against a high fat diet.
Well, look at the supplemental data, please.
If you give it to the mice every other day,
we had mice living over three years.
Wow, that's a long time.
I have got many, many mice in my ownership
in my lab at Stanford,
and that's a very long life for a mouse.
It was by far.
And so it was a long lifespan extension.
And what that told me is that probably
you don't want to be taking a supplement every day.
You can take it either every other day
or give your body a rest.
And I do the same with my meals.
I rest during the day and then I give a nutritious dinner
to my body and then give it a rest.
Same with exercise.
And then I try to time it because there are times
when I'm taking the drug metformin,
which mimics low energy. For those of you who don't know,
metformin is a drug given to type 2 diabetics
to bring down their blood sugar levels.
But it's been found that looking at tens of thousands
of veterans and others,
that those two type 2 diabetics live longer than people
that don't even get type 2 diabetes.
So it's a longevity drug.
Right now you have to get it from your doctor in the US
and most other countries,
you can just get it over the counter.
And you protect it, it looks like,
based on epidemiological data, cancer, heart disease,
frailty, what else, dementia.
So I take metformin.
You take metformin and your fasting each day.
So when do you take it relative to the fasting?
Yeah, I always take metformin in the morning,
along with the resveratrol,
because for a number of reasons,
but mainly because my body responds better
and I've been measuring my body for 12, 13 years.
But here's the thing, if I'm going to exercise that day,
I will skip the metformin.
And a lot of people who do pay attention
to this kind of thing,
think that they should stop taking metformin
because they're never going to get muscle
or it's going to affect their ability to build up muscle.
But that's not true.
What metformin does to you,
it actually just reduces your ability to have stamina
because it's inhibiting your body's ability
to make energy.
And so what happens is when you're on metformin,
you do fewer reps, but guess what?
Those muscles that you do build up on metformin
have the same strength and have much lower inflammation
and other markers of aging.
You just won't have that extra 5% size of muscles.
So if you want large muscles, don't take metformin
and you'll be fine during your exercise.
But for me, I'm not trying to get giant.
I want strong muscles and I want to live longer
and healthier.
So I just try to time it so that I get the most reps
out of my exercise regime.
But sometimes in scientific literature,
it's worth bringing this up.
If there's a 5% difference in a graph,
then either the press release or some reporter will say,
oh my goodness, big difference,
5% can't take metformin during exercise.
That's the headline.
And then you go in and it's barely significant.
And the graph is distorted because they've changed the axes
to make it look bigger.
And now it's become a myth that metformin
greatly inhibits your ability to exercise,
which is not true.
But in an abundance of caution,
I skip my metformin on days I'm going to exercise.
And not only that, I'm one of the 20% of people
that has a stomach sensitivity to it.
So if I'm not feeling great that day,
I don't take it either.
You mentioned metformin is available only by prescription
from a doctor, at least in the US.
Berberine, this is a substance that comes from tree bark,
who I also learned about many years ago from Ori.
He said, if ever I'm going to overeat
like a Thanksgiving meal or something, I take berberine.
Those were his words.
And I tried it.
And what's remarkable about berberine
is that you can eat enormous quantities of food
and not feel as if you've eaten enormous quantities of food.
I'm not necessarily recommending people do this,
but what I noticed was if I took berberine,
which my understanding is it works very similarly
to metformin, works on the AMPK pathway
and the mTOR pathway, et cetera,
that if I didn't ingest food in particular carbohydrates,
I would feel a little dizzy and kind of get a headache,
like almost hypoglycemic.
What are your thoughts on berberine
as an alternative to metformin?
And are there any cautionary notes?
I mean, obviously people should talk to their doctor
before adding or subtracting anything from their life,
including breath work or anything that comes up.
But with all that set aside,
what are your thoughts about berberine
and timing of low blood sugar and these sorts of things?
Right.
Well, before I had access to metformin,
I was taking berberine.
It's often known as the poor man's metformin.
He just called me poor.
Women can take it too.
So the thing with berberine, and we started it in my lab,
it is effective at boosting energetics in the body,
just like AMPK and metformin does.
And we've actually given it to rats and mice
and seen that they are very healthy,
especially on a high-fat diet.
So I think it's likely to be good.
There are some human studies that exist,
clinical trials showing that it increases
insulin sensitivity.
You have to take high doses.
Which is a good thing, right?
Yeah.
I think when people hear insulin sensitivity,
sometimes people think, oh, well, that's bad, right?
No, but you want your cells to be insulin sensitive.
You don't want a lot of blood sugar floating around
that can't be sequestered into cells.
Exactly.
So this is anti-type 2 diabetes.
And so this berberine does have wonderful effects
on the metabolism of animals and in some clinical trials
on dozens of people it's been tested.
Now there's one cautionary tale, which just came up.
Matt Kaeberlein's lab published that berberine
reduced the lifespan of worms.
But I'm not sure worms trump human clinical trials
at this point.
So I would say-
Not in my opinion.
But no disrespect to my C. elegans colleagues,
or rather my colleagues that work on C. elegans.
Yeah.
Well, what I like to do is to give all the information
people can decide what they want.
But I would say if, based on the worm data,
I wouldn't panic just yet.
I think berberine has been shown
to be really safe in humans.
You mentioned resveratrol.
I think now would be a great time to talk a little bit
about protocols for resveratrol,
grape seed extract, et cetera.
Let's start with the obvious one
that I know you get a lot.
But for the record, can't I just drink red wine
and get enough resveratrol, David?
You can try.
You need to drink about 200 glasses a day.
So I-
I'm sure it's been tried.
There are some.
And I drink a glass of red wine a day if I get the chance.
But any more than that, it's a lot of calories
and your liver will get fatty and it's all bad.
So realistically, you can only get the thousand milligrams
that I take a day from a supplement that's pure.
Now, there are a lot of people selling resveratrol.
If it's not light gray or white in color, throw it away.
The brown stuff has gone bad or is contaminated.
And the contaminated stuff, beware, it'll cause diarrhea.
But regular resveratrol should not do that.
So a thousand milligrams per day is what you do?
Yeah, and I have for about 15 years now.
And you ingest that with some fatty substance
like olive oil or yogurt, is that right?
Yeah, you have to.
And other supplements, quercetin, curcumin,
these are crunchy things.
They're not going to get through your gut.
And I'm not just making this up.
I always base my statements on human studies.
So we've done a lot of studies on resveratrol
as have others since.
And we know that from, we found out early,
I was one of the first people to take a high dose
for resveratrol.
And when we included it with food,
the levels in my blood went up fivefold.
And so you want to have something in there.
If you just drink it with water,
it's not going to get through.
And unfortunately, some people have done clinical trials
without even thinking that they might need
to dissolve it in something.
So are you taking this all at once in the morning
and chasing it with some olive oil?
Or are you dissolving it in yogurt?
What's the specific protocol?
Yeah, I've been improving, perfecting what I do.
For about 10 years, I would take some Greek yogurt,
a couple of spoonfuls, put the resveratrol on there,
mix it around, make sure it's dissolved,
and put that in my mouth and swallow that.
These days, what I like to do,
because I've realized that olive oil,
and particularly oleic acid,
one of the monounsaturated fatty acids,
is also an activator of the sirtuin defenses.
So I'm trying to ingest more oleic acid.
So I switched to olive oil.
What I do is I put a couple of teaspoons of olive oil
in a glass, mix around the resveratrol,
and maybe some quercetin, a similar molecule,
make sure it's dissolved.
I put a little bit of vinegar,
and if I have a basil leaf, I'll put that in,
and it's like drinking some salad dressing, and it's great.
Delicious.
That raises a question that I want to ask
before we get to NMN and NR and vitamin B3,
which is, by doing that,
do you think that it breaks your fast?
And I want to just frame this question of breaking the fast
in a more general scientific theme,
and I'd love your thoughts on this.
One of the questions I get asked all the time is,
does ingesting blank break the fast?
Does eating this or drinking this, coffee,
if I walk in the room and someone else is eating a cracker,
does it break my fast?
People get pretty extreme with this.
My sense, and please tell me if I'm wrong,
but my sense is that it depends on the context
of what you did the night before,
whether or not you're diabetic, lots of things.
So for instance, if I eat an enormous meal at midnight,
go to sleep, wake up at 6 a.m.,
I could imagine that black coffee
or coffee with a little bit of cream
might quote unquote break my fast,
but the body doesn't have a breaking the fast switch.
The body only speaks in the language of glucose,
AMPK, mTOR, et cetera.
So do you worry that ingesting these calories
is going to quote unquote break your fast?
And more generally, how do you think about the issue
of whether or not you're fasting enough
to get these positive effects?
Because not everybody can manage on just water or just tea,
or we should say not everybody is willing to manage
on just water or just tea for a certain part of the day.
Well, my first answer is not scientific, it's philosophical.
If you don't enjoy life, what's the point?
And so I'd like a cup of coffee in the morning,
little bit of milk, spoonful of yogurt's not gonna kill me.
Olive oil doesn't have protein or carbs in it, not many.
And so I'm probably not affecting
those longevity pathways negatively.
But without that, first of all,
I wouldn't enjoy my life as much.
Well, the olive oil is not as great as the yogurt,
but I'm trying to optimize.
And there's no perfect solution to what we're doing.
And we're still learning.
We don't know what's optimal for me,
let alone everybody else.
But I'm with you, I don't believe that taking
a couple of spoonfuls of something
unless it's high fructose corn syrup is gonna hurt you
because I've now got the rest of the day
till about eight, nine p.m. of not eating anything.
And I forgive myself for that.
And there's a really good point here.
You and I were discussing this earlier.
The point about doing this is that you try to do your best.
If you go from regular living to don't eat the whole day,
you're gonna fail, like quitting smoking cold turkey.
It's easier to chew gum and stick the patch on
because your body has to get used to all sorts of habits.
And it's social, it's physical,
putting stuff in your mouth, chewing,
not just the low blood sugar levels.
And your brain will fight it.
Your limbic system is gonna go, hey, do it, do it, do it.
And you're gonna have to fight it.
But once you get through it, you'll be better.
But you do it in stages.
Do breakfast first, then do small lunch,
and then eventually cut lunch out.
Don't go cold turkey because everyone knows
it's a fact that if you try to do a strict diet
right out of the gates, you'll almost always fail.
No, I think that captures the essence of fasting rationally
and a rational approach to supplementation very well.
Along the lines of supplementation,
what about NMN, NR, and B3 niacin?
I want to know what you do.
I also want to know what I should do.
And I think most people want to know what they should do.
I mean, these are molecules that impact the sirtuin pathway,
impact the pathways that control aging
or rates of aging in the epigenome.
How do they do that?
And how does one incorporate that
into a supplementation protocol,
should they choose to do that?
All right.
Well, disclaimer is that I don't recommend anything,
but I talk about what I do.
So a bit of scientific background.
These sirtuin genes that we discovered,
first in yeast cells when I was at MIT,
and then in animals as I moved to Harvard in the 2000s.
And one of my first postdocs,
actually literally my first postdoc, Chaim Cohen,
published a great paper just a couple of months ago
and found that turning on the sirtuin 6 gene,
remember the 7, number 6 gene is very potent.
It extended the lifespan dramatically of mice
that he engineered, both males and females, which is great.
So what you want to do is,
so naturally boost the activity of these sirtuins.
They are genes, but they also make proteins.
That's what genes typically make or encode.
And then those proteins take care of the body
in many different ways, as we've discussed.
So how do you turn on these genes
and make the proteins they make even more active?
You want to rev up that system.
So exercise will do it, fasting will do it.
What about supplementation?
Well, the first activator of the sirtuins
that we discovered that acts on the enzyme
to make it do a better job of cleaning up the body
and protecting was resveratrol.
We looked at thousands of different molecules,
eventually tens of thousands.
And the one that was the best was resveratrol in the dish.
And then we gave it to little organisms, worms,
and then flies and mice, eventually humans.
And we saw that it activated that enzyme.
So resveratrol is one way to activate it.
You can think of it as the accelerator pedal on a car.
It revs it up, but there's something else
that the sirtuins need to work, and that's NAD.
NAD is a really small molecule,
a little chemical in the body that we need for life.
It's used by the body for chemical reactions,
400 different reactions in the body,
and without it, you're dead within seconds.
You need NAD.
The problem that we've seen is that NAD levels decline
as you become obese, as you get older,
if you don't ever get hungry.
And the body not only doesn't make enough of it,
it's chewing it up as well.
There's an enzyme called CD38 that Eric Verdin over at UCSF
showed chews up, oh, he's now at the Buck Institute
in California, chews up NAD.
As you get older, so it's a double whammy.
You don't make as much, you chew it up,
which is really bad because what we've shown in my lab
and so have others is that NAD levels are really important
for keeping those sirtuin defenses at a youthful level.
And you can give a lot of resveratrol,
but if you don't have the fuel,
you're basically accelerating a car
that doesn't have enough gas.
So you wanna do both, and that's what I do.
I take a precursor to NAD called NMN,
and the body uses that to make the NAD molecule in one step.
And so I know from measuring dozens of human beings
that if you take NMN for the time period that I do,
I've been taking it for years,
but if you take it for about two weeks,
you will double, on average,
double your NAD levels in the blood, okay?
That's not public information.
That's from clinical trials that are not yet published
over the last two years.
There are other ways to increase NAD levels
in someone like me who's getting older, I'm 52 now.
You can take NR, which is used to make NMN,
which is used to make NAD.
And both NMN and NR are sold by companies in the U.S.
NR lacks the phosphate.
Phosphate's a small chemical that the body needs.
You've probably heard of the atom phosphorus.
Let's go back one step.
How do you make NR?
NR gets made from vitamin B3 often.
You can also find it in milk and other foods.
But sometimes people ask me,
why don't you just take vitamin B3
and won't that just force the body to make NAD?
And the answer is no, it doesn't work very well.
We know this just by doing the experiment.
But the reason I think is, is that NAD is a,
I said it's a small molecule,
but relative to vitamin B3, it's big.
It's got those phosphates on there.
It's got a sugar.
It's got the vitamin B attached.
So you've got all these components that come together
to make this very complicated little molecule called NAD.
And when you give NMN, it contains all three components
that the body needs to make NAD.
If you give NR, or just vitamin B3,
which is an even smaller molecule,
the body has to find these other components
from somewhere else.
So where do you get phosphate?
Well, body needs it for DNA, needs it for bones.
So high doses of something
that requires additional phosphate
makes me a little concerned.
And we have compared NMN and NR head-to-head
in mouse studies.
For instance, NMN we've shown in a cell paper
a few years ago, makes mice run further.
Old mice can run 50% further
because they had better blood flow, better energy.
NR at the same dose did not do that.
In fact, it had no effect.
I see, dosage-wise, if I were elect to take NMN
in supplement form to increase my NAD levels
and presumably slow my aging,
how much NMN should I take?
What's the protocol that you do?
And are the various forms that are out there,
are some better or some worse?
Well, I'm always happy to tell you what I do
and what my father does, my 82-year-old father.
We take a gram of NMN every day.
So it's a gram of resveratrol and a gram of NMN.
Right.
Okay, 1,000 milligrams.
Now, another important point,
which is I'm not the same as everybody else.
I have a different microbiome, age, sex, right?
And so I've been measuring myself.
And so I know if something's,
or I think I know if something's making me better or worse
based on measuring 45 different things.
So I just want people to be aware
that what I do may not perfectly work at all for others.
But I have studied, as I said,
dozens of people who take NMN at a gram,
sometimes two grams.
And I know by looking at all those people
that without any exceptions,
that if you do what I do,
your NAD levels go up by about twofold or more.
And so I do that every day, the 1,000 milligrams.
Now, people sell it.
Now, I never get into brands and all that.
First of all, I don't have the time to measure products.
I don't know, though I should say,
I do want to say I'm working on a solution
for people to know what works
and what's real and what isn't, but I'm not there yet.
And in the meantime, I would say,
if you do want to buy this,
let's say you want to buy NMN,
look for a company that is well-established,
that has high levels of quality control.
Look for three letters, GMP,
which is good manufacturing practices.
And so that means they make it
under a certain level of quality control.
You're not going to find iron filings in there,
and it probably has the stuff in it that they say it does.
So that's all I can say right now.
I'm working on something that's going to be much more helpful.
But overall, make sure it's white, crystalline, NMN,
and that to me, it tastes like burnt popcorn.
You crack open the capsules and you'll take a little sample
to make sure it tastes like burnt popcorn.
Well, when I'm making my capsules, I'll taste it.
And I do a lot of quality control on the stuff that I take.
Do you take that gram all at once with the resveratrol
or do you take it spread throughout the day?
It's all in the morning for those things.
So if I take metformin, it's NMN
and the resveratrol all together.
And there's a good reason for that.
It's all scientific, I try to be.
The levels of NAD go up in the morning
in our bodies naturally.
Our bodies actually have a cycle of NAD, it's not steady.
It's circadian.
In fact, NAD controls your clock.
This was shown by Shin, MI, and colleagues
in a nice science paper about a decade ago
that if you disrupt the NAD cycle,
which is controlled by the sirtuin gene that we worked on,
that is what's telling your body, oh, it's time to eat,
it's time to go to sleep.
And if you take the NMN late at night,
for example, you can disrupt your circadian rhythms.
Interesting.
Conversely, when I travel and I want to reset my clock
to the time zone, I will take a boost of NMN in the morning
and I feel great.
Does this protocol for you,
does it produce any immediate effects
of increased energy, et cetera?
You mentioned that one would, if it's right for them,
would have to take it for at least two weeks
to start to see the NAD levels increase.
At that point, when NAD levels increase,
could one possibly expect an increase
in overall energy focus, et cetera?
I realize we're not making promises here,
but I'm just wondering whether or not the only measure
of whether or not this protocol is working
is whether or not you die at age blank or blank plus 20.
And of course, once you're dead,
you can't really know if you would have lived longer
if you'd done something differently and vice versa.
Sure, well, there was a study, again, by Shina Mai,
my good friend at Washington University in St. Louis,
that showed that it improves,
remember, this insulin sensitivity, which is a good thing.
But you can't know your insulin sensitivity
unless you're measuring a glucose,
have a glucose monitor on your arm.
Do you have one on right now?
No.
No, I used to.
I learned a lot.
Yeah, last time I saw you had this thing.
It looks like a small leech, not a large leech,
and it was measuring your blood glucose.
They're very informative
because you learn what your body reacts to,
and grapes were really bad.
Rhonda Patrick agrees with that.
But the issue was what, where were we, Andrew?
The issue is whether or not
you can expect any immediate effects
on energy, vitality, focus, just even subjective.
So what do you feel is the question?
And anecdotally,
because I've been taking this for a long time,
if I don't take it, I start to feel 50 years old.
It's horrible.
I can't think straight.
It may be placebo, but who knows?
But what we're doing now are very careful clinical trials.
We've done the safety for two years,
and we're now treating elderly patients
at Harvard Medical School with some wonderful colleagues.
And those people are actually going to be,
and currently in MRIs,
so you can measure the energetics and the NAD levels
in their legs as they exercise in real time.
And that will tell us if what we see in the mice,
this increased endurance, actually works.
In the meantime, it's fun to talk about anecdotes.
I have a number of athlete friends,
some of which have increased their,
lowered their time in marathons, for example.
There's a good friend of ours in our circle
that is winning marathons at age 50 now.
And he attributes that to the protocol that he's on.
Interesting.
I haven't started taking NMN,
but I'm planning to do that when my next birthday arrives,
which is in a couple of months.
But I do experiments on my sister and have for years,
I have a sister who's three years older than I am,
who is very enthusiastic about these protocols.
And I'll tell you that after reading your book,
I started purchasing for her
and giving her an NMN supplement.
And she claims, and I believe her,
she has a quite sensitive system
and she's very tuned into it.
She feels far and away better when she takes it
as opposed to when she doesn't.
And I've done the control experiment of removing her supply
and then giving it back to her and this kind of thing.
So that's my other laboratory.
This is what younger brothers do to older sisters.
I have a question about something that,
if it has no relevance,
we can just treat it as a speed bump and then move right on.
And the artificial sweeteners, these things that,
or I should say non-glucose increasing sweeteners.
So you've got stevia, which is a plant basically,
and then you've got sucralose and aspartame
and all these things.
There is some evidence that I know we're both aware of,
they've been published in quite reputable journals
showing that they can disrupt the gut microbiome
in certain cases, in particular saccharin,
the one that basically nobody uses anymore.
And it's questionable as to whether or not stevia
has the same negative effects, et cetera.
That's not what this is about.
But in terms of the sensation of,
or the perception of sweet taste,
is that itself a possible detriment to these pro-longevity,
forgive me for using the term, the pathways.
If I were to drink a Diet Coke during a fast,
am I somehow disrupting this?
And I'm asking this question
because I get asked this question a lot.
Well, there may be small effects.
I don't think they're worth worrying about.
Joe Rogan laughed at me
because I was drinking a Diet Coke
during the first interview I did with him.
I will drink Diet Coke.
I've read the scientific literature.
And again, it's this 5% thing
that I think is blown out of proportion.
If I was to put a number on it,
I would say if eating a high sugary meal
or drinking a sugar-filled soda,
what is that, 30 grams of sugar,
let's say that's a 10 out of 10 bad for you.
A Diet Coke might be a one.
And if I'm, you know, which am I gonna do?
I could have a 10 or a one or go without in my life.
I'll do the one on occasion.
I try to avoid them because I don't like the ones as much.
But you can't say that sucralose
is equivalent to drinking a sugary soda.
There's just no comparison.
And I think, what is it, stevia.
I do use stevia whenever I can
because it's a naturally sourced product.
And I haven't seen any good evidence yet
that it's bad for you.
But I think a lot of this is overblown.
And a lot of it's the media trying to give equal weight
to stories, as you know, as a scientist,
it can be frustrating when something's a 10
and something's a one and they're equated.
How do I say this respectfully?
I think if science journalists were required
to post their credentials alongside their name,
people would take the articles
with an additional grain of salt, right?
I mean, in other words,
that I think that the science media
is mainly generated around two specific goals.
One is to make people very, very afraid
or get people very, very excited.
And oftentimes the get people excited part
is sponsored content.
And I think that's overlooked.
In any case, thank you for that.
I want to talk about iron and iron load.
We were talking earlier about ferritin
and of course women mend straight.
And so their iron needs are greater
than people, men that don't mend straight
or women that don't mend straight.
I don't think we can get right down
into how much iron somebody needs
because it'll vary person to person.
But I was surprised to learn that iron
is actually going to accelerate the aging process
in various contexts.
Well, this is a new finding out of Spain.
Manuel Serrano's lab has found that excess iron
will increase the number of senescent cells in the body.
And senescent cells are these zombie cells
that accumulate as you get older
and they sit there and they cause inflammation mainly
and also can cause cancer.
And it's found that if you get rid of these cells
or never accumulate them, you stay younger in animals.
And there's some really interesting studies
out of Mayo Clinic in humans as well.
So iron is a pro-senescent metal.
And so what I think is that if you're taking excess iron
as a supplement, you're probably accelerating
your aging process.
The other thing that I found really interesting
is I've looked at hundreds of thousands of people's
metabolism and their blood biomarkers.
I was one of the first people in Inside Tracker
as a board member and I'm still a scientific lead guy.
So I can look anonymously at hundreds of thousands
of people's blood work.
And we also know how fit they are, how old they are.
Some of them are marathon runners,
some of them are CrossFit.
And there's a signature of health that actually
is different than your average person.
Now, I'm not gonna say bad things about MDs
because a lot of my best friends are MDs
and I work with them at Harvard Medical School.
The issue though is that with MD training,
there's a scale of what's normal.
And if you're out of that normal range,
something must be wrong.
That's the paradigm that they work under.
But first of all, everybody's different
and you wanna know their baseline and track people
over years to know what's normal for them.
And what I find, for example,
is people who are really healthy and live the way I do
and have a diet that's fairly vegetarian but not strict
still have slightly low hemoglobin levels,
slightly low iron, slightly low ferritin,
but we have super amounts of energy.
We're not anemic and we're getting along with great in life.
But a doctor who just looks at that might say,
oh, we need to give you more iron, right?
So what I'm getting at is an example of
we need to personalize medicine
and look at people over the long run
to know what works for them and what's healthy for them,
and not just work towards the average human
but work towards what's optimal for human.
I love that answer.
You mentioned tracking and tracking over time,
and this is a really interesting area
that I know you have been focused on for a long time.
I've been getting blood work done about every six months,
frankly, since I was in college.
I like data and I got interested in supplementation
and exercise because it made me feel better,
but I also want to know what was going on under the hood.
So you get numbers back.
You get this hormone, that hormone,
this blood glucose measure, et cetera.
How do you make sense of the data?
I mean, what Inside Tracker is doing aside,
how do you personally make sense of the data
in ways that might differ from the way
that a standard MD might look at one of these charts?
Because the standard practice is to say,
is it red, yellow, or green, right?
Is it basically too high or too low?
Is it somewhere close to the margins or are you okay?
Are you in these ranges?
Are there any things that you pay attention to
that you think are particularly interesting
for people to just take note of?
I mean, we're not asking you
to go against anybody's physician,
but what sorts of things should people
start to educate themselves about
in terms of what these molecules are on their charts
if they choose to get them and what do you look at?
Yeah, well, there's a lot there.
The first is that you should be tracking things
because one measurement isn't enough.
These things vary and over time,
and if you can have a decade or more of data,
it's super informative as you know well know, as you know.
So the physician, interestingly, my physician,
let's take him as an example.
So he sees me, he says, how are you feeling?
I'm feeling great, okay, see you next year.
That's craziness.
Anyway, so I say, okay, stop.
Let's talk a little bit about-
Let me educate you.
That's what David tells his physician.
I imagine that the like 12-year-old David Sinclair
says to his physician, listen,
let's have a different discussion.
Is that how it works?
It is.
It is, he finds me pretty annoying as does my dentist.
But so I said, stop, hang on, I've got this data.
I've got the inside tracker data.
So I pull that up on the screen
and I'm showing him the changes in my cholesterol,
in my CRP, which is inflammatory marker, as you know,
and we're going through it
and you can see things change over time
and I've corrected them as they go slightly
out of the optimal range for me,
which is different than what he would do, of course.
But what was funny is that he says, this is great.
I love this data, but I'm not allowed to get this
because of course the insurance companies won't pay for it.
So again, you can pay out of pocket.
It's not super expensive.
I would say if you save a bit of money on a coffee,
you can afford this kind of stuff.
But the main point is that doctors do like this data.
It's just that they're unable to spend the money
on every one of their patients to get it.
Is there a code word that someone can use
with their physician that will trigger
a comprehensive blood test?
I keep trying to figure out what's the code
that one needs to ask or tell their doctor,
like I'm feeling blank so that they get a full blood panel.
Well, do you have to be hemorrhaging
from the gut or something?
Well, I usually use the WTH method, which is what the hell?
And then he says, okay, we'll do it.
Cause I think a lot of people out there are thinking,
look, I'd love to have blood work repeatedly over time,
but that's hard to get for financial reasons.
But also a lot of people just don't know
how to approach the conversation.
And this is one of the things
that I hope that we can educate people on,
that they deserve to know what's going on inside their body
and that it makes a doctor's visit worthwhile
and that you don't have to feign illness in order to do it.
Right, yeah, and a lot of people do.
So I would say if you can afford these tests,
there are an increasing number of companies
that offer these tests.
Insight Tracker is one of them.
And you just do it a couple of times a year at a minimum,
and then you can share that with your doctor.
If you can't afford that, then I would say to your doctor,
here are the main ones that Andrew and David do.
Yeah, and we must.
And there's an email that is something like a phone number,
rather it's 555-5555.
I think if they have any complaints,
they can just call that number.
David will pick up on East Coast business hours
and I'll pick up outside of those hours.
But there were some main ones.
I would say your blood sugar levels,
you want to do your HbA1c,
which is your average glucose levels over the month.
There's CRP, which I mentioned for inflammation.
Let's talk about C-reactive protein for a second,
because I think it's been shown to be an early marker
of macular degeneration, of heart disease,
of a variety of different things.
CRP is something that we don't hear enough about, I think.
Maybe, what do you know about CRP that I don't?
I'm guessing a lot, but.
Oh, it was originally picked up as something
that was associated with heart disease
in the Framingham study, I believe.
It is the best marker for cardiovascular inflammation
and is also, we use it as a predictor of longevity.
And its levels go up with mortality.
And so this is an association,
but there's enough data that I would say,
if you have high levels of CRP,
you need to get your levels down quickly.
And the levels usually go up with age
and with levels of inflammation.
So the ways to get it down would be to switch the diet,
eat less, try to eat more vegetables.
You'll find it will come down.
There are also drugs that can do it.
Anti-inflammatories can do it as well.
But CRP is, it's actually HCRP.
There's a high-sensitive or HSCRP.
Your doctor will know.
Get one of those readings,
because if you've got normal blood sugar levels,
your doctor, or fasting blood sugar levels,
your doctor might say you're fine.
But a lot of people have normal blood sugar,
but have high CRP, which is just as bad for you long-term
and can predict a future heart attack.
On the lines of heart attack,
I want your thoughts on cholesterol,
and serum cholesterol, and dietary cholesterol.
I cannot, for the life of me,
get my arms around this literature.
And even if I ignore all the essentially nonsense
that's out there in various social media groups
that saying cholesterol is the worst thing in the world,
or cholesterol is not, or dietary cholesterol
has nothing to do with serum cholesterol
and nothing to do with longevity,
I can't seem to sort through the very basic data
that essentially ask,
is having high levels of LDL going to kill me earlier?
Should I be striving to always reduce LDL and increase HDL?
Is that a reasonable goal?
And if so, is dietary cholesterol
the primary determinant of that?
And just as a final point about this,
I am aware of quite good data that shows that anorexics,
people that essentially eat no food
unless you force them to,
can often have very high LDL.
So their dietary cholesterol is essentially zero,
and so they're manufacturing a lot of their own.
So realize this isn't your primary area of expertise,
but you're a smart guy.
You think about this kind of stuff a lot.
What do you think is going on
with the cholesterol literature,
and will we ever get to the bottom of this
as a scientific and medical community?
Because to me, it is rather perplexing.
It is, but you can get through the politics.
I know a fair bit about cholesterol
because it's in my family history,
and I was headed for an early death.
My grandmother had a stroke at 30.
That's how bad I am in terms of my genetics.
So I went on a statin,
and I know there's a lot of people
who say that statins long-term are bad.
It's associated with Alzheimer's disease.
I've been taking a statin since I was 29,
and that's because I forced my same doctor
to give me the statin.
The conversation was something like this.
You're too young to be on a statin.
I said, what, you want me to have a heart attack
before you give me something?
Give it to me now.
So 29, I've been on a statin,
and my cholesterol was way up beyond 300,
which is a massive, massive.
Basically, my blood was creamy to look at.
So I've now got my cholesterol down to low, low levels
to what would it be?
You could check on my inside tracker,
but so my ratio of HDL to LDL,
which you want to be less than five, is now two,
and the LDL is below 100.
So it's all good.
And I've measured my cardiovascular health with an MRI.
I've got a movie of my heart beating.
I've still got a heart of a 20-year-old.
So that's working.
I'm willing to forego the risk
that the statin is causing problems later
because of my family history.
But other people, I would say,
be aware that statins aren't perfect drugs.
There are some interesting new ones.
There's one called the PSK-9 inhibitor,
which is, I think, fortnightly, every two weeks, injection.
That blocks the release of LDL from the liver.
And then that seems to be great for lowering cholesterol,
but also has other benefits that might be pro-longevity.
And there were some people that I was just talking to
are on the cutting edge of this,
and their doctors are trying them on this drug
instead of the statin.
So you could talk to your doctor about that.
Do you avoid dietary cholesterol for that reason also?
Red meat, butter.
I mean, I happen to love butter.
I love red meat.
I realize there's some people who don't.
My cholesterol is a little bit high,
but I'm working to bring that down a bit,
although not by altering my food intake yet.
But what do you think is the relationship
between dietary cholesterol and serum cholesterol?
And what's going on with the liver?
Why are anorexics, why is their serum cholesterol so high
when they're eating nothing?
Well, there've been a number of papers over the years
that have been ignored.
And our friend, Peter Atiyah,
brought to my attention recently a new study
that I think definitively said
that dietary cholesterol has almost zero impact
on blood cholesterol levels.
Good.
Yeah, so I'm annoyed,
because I've been avoiding eggs and butter
for most of my life, and I didn't have to.
So I had eggs plenty of time, at least in your case.
Yeah, yeah, so that's the thing.
You can eat these foods that were once banned,
because it's very difficult to take cholesterol up
into the body from the gut,
and most of it's being synthesized in the body.
Wow, I'm just pausing there for a second,
because I think that it's what we've been told,
six meals a day, eat a lot of grains and fruits
and this kind of thing, avoid cholesterol.
I mean, basically everything we learned in the 80s and 90s
and early 2000s is getting flipped on its head now.
But, and I think this is a very strong caveat
that's important to mention, amino acids,
in particular the amino acids
that come from animal products, right?
Seem to have some pro-aging effect on them, right?
At least the way that I've heard you describe your diet.
And I'm somebody who enjoys meat, I like it.
But, so I'm by no means a vegan at all.
But I've heard you say you eat mostly plants,
but a little bit of fish or chicken
or something of that sort, or eggs or,
but is that specifically to avoid
excessive amino acid intake?
Or is it something specific about plants
that excites you with respect to,
I mean, vegetables are delicious too, but what is it?
Is it something great about plants
or is it something bad about, when I think of meat,
I guess the biologist in me thinks amino acids, right?
I don't think top sirloin, I think amino acid.
No, I think top sirloin as I'm eating it,
but really what they are are amino acids, including leucine.
Yeah, well, there are two good things about plants
and neither of them is taste for me.
I would eat steak all the time if I could.
I did when I was a kid, I'm an Australian.
But plants have two benefits.
One is that they're highly nutritious
and they'll give you a lot of the vitamins
and nutrients that I need.
I don't take a multivitamin, I don't wanna
have the excess iron in my body.
So there's that high density nutrition.
So those dark leaves, if it's a spinach salad, great.
Second is that there is what's called
xenohormatic molecules in plants.
That term xenohormesis is a term that I came up with
with my friend Conrad Howitz, which means
stressed plants make molecules that benefit your health.
I'll break it down.
Xeno means between species and hormesis is the term
whatever doesn't kill you makes you stronger
and live longer.
And the idea is that when plants are stressed out,
think of a grapevine that's dried out
and they're starting to harvest the grapes,
which is typically how it's done.
They are full with resveratrol because resveratrol
is a plant defense molecule that I think is made
to activate those sirtuin genes in a plant.
So plants have sirtuins just like we do.
But by purifying or at least concentrating
in a light proof bottle and keeping it out of the air,
we stabilize this xenohormatic molecule,
or it's a cocktail, not just one, there's others in wine.
We then ingest those and get the benefits
of activating our own defenses
because our food was getting stressed out.
And by stressed, I don't mean psychologically stressed,
I mean biologically stressed.
And so I try to eat plants that have gone through
a bit of stress, they might be brightly colored,
they've had too much sun or got nibbled on by a caterpillar.
So you go to places where it's organic or it's fresh,
local, and those are the plants that aren't perfect
and they probably have high concentrations
of these molecules.
And in addition, I also buy the supplements
to make sure I'm getting enough of those as well.
Which supplements mimic that?
Well, so resveratrol will,
there's another one called chrysotin,
or chrysotin, some people call it,
which you find in trace amounts in apples and onions.
And we also showed back in 2003
that it activates sirtuins as well,
but others have, 20 years later,
found that it kills senescent cells
or helps kill senescent cells.
So it's a double whammy with that molecule.
And are you actively picking out the peaches
that look like they were nibbled on by a caterpillar?
No, but I don't worry if they've been banged up a bit.
What's the story with antioxidants?
Are they of any value whatsoever?
Because the way that you described them at the beginning
and what I've heard recently is that
they are not all the rage for anti-aging.
What are they doing that's useful?
Should we be seeking out antioxidants anyway
for other cellular health purposes?
Well, yeah, antioxidants are not going to hurt you
unless you take mega doses.
We do need some oxidants for our immune system.
And there's even what's called mitohormesis,
which is your mitochondria power packs
need to have a little bit of these free radicals
to be able to function.
So you don't want to overdose on these antioxidants,
vitamin C, vitamin E, don't overdo it.
You don't take a multivitamin, correct?
Right.
I think I'm going to stop after this conversation
because I've always just taken one
for the kind of insurance purpose,
which is a stupid purpose, not actual insurance,
but just thinking, oh, you know,
I'll top off on my ACBD.
Right, and I'll pee out what I don't need.
Right, but that never bothered me.
The whole expensive pee thing never got,
that argument never got me
because a good vitamin is not that expensive.
I just figured better safe than sorry,
but it may be that it's detrimental.
Well, it can in the case of iron,
as we discussed, and the antioxidants.
So when I came into the aging field in the early 1990s,
it was all about antioxidants.
And we thought that enzymes by the name of catalase
and superoxide dismutase
were going to be the key to longevity.
It turns out that it's largely been a failure
that giving animals and humans antioxidants
haven't had the longevity benefits that we dreamed of.
And the main reason is that there's a lot more going on
than just free radical damage.
The epigenome gets disrupted.
We've got these proteins misfolding.
So the problem really has been that we didn't realize
that you need to turn on the body's natural defenses
against that plus a whole host of other things
to get the true benefits.
But I'm not going to say it's a problem
taking an antioxidant drink.
Pomegranate juice for one is full of good stuff,
including xenochromatic molecules.
But resveratrol is a good case in point,
which is when I worked on resveratrol
as a longevity molecule,
first we showed it in yeast and worms and flies and mice.
Before that, it was thought that resveratrol
was good for your heart in red wine,
when you drink red wine, because it's an antioxidant.
So then we showed that it extended the lifespan
of yeast cells through this genetic pathway, the sirtuins.
And we then tested whether resveratrol,
if we changed one atom to make it not an antioxidant,
guess what?
It still worked fine.
So it wasn't its antioxidant activity
that was extending lifespan.
It was its ability to turn on the yeast's defenses
against aging.
Conversely, when we gave the yeast antioxidants,
they lived shorter.
So yeah, that was the beginning of my transformation
into thinking, turn on the body's defenses,
don't give it the antioxidants.
This is an opportunity for me to say
something that I've been wanting to say for a long time,
which is that what's so wonderful about science
is that because the goal is mechanism,
you can really start to understand, as you just described,
what actually mediates a process
is very different than what modulates a process.
I mean, if a fire alarm goes off in the building right now,
it's going to modulate our attention.
That doesn't mean that it controls our attention.
It's not mechanistically relevant.
And so I think this thing about antioxidants
is one of these cases, it sounds like,
where it's in the right ballpark,
but until one really unveils the mechanism as you have,
you can be, one can or a field can be badly wrong
for a very long period of time.
It sounds like the sirtuins,
and really getting down to the guts of the machinery
of what causes cells to age is really what it's about.
Zooming way out, what are the behavioral tools
that one can start to think about
in terms of ways to modulate these,
basically the way that DNA is being expressed
and functioning?
I've heard you talk before about hormesis of other sorts,
cold exposure, we talked about fasting.
We talked about exercise in broad terms,
but what about any evidence, if it exists,
as to whether or not aerobic training
versus weight training, these sorts of things.
In other words, what are the sorts of things
that people can do to improve the sirtuin pathway?
And I realize that they're caveats.
We can't go directly from a behavior to sirtuins,
but in the general theme, what can people do?
What do you do?
Right.
Well, we know that aerobic exercise in mice and rats
raises their NAD levels and their levels of sirt,
one of the genes goes up to actually number one
and number three.
What we don't know yet is what type of exercise
is optimal to get them to change.
We will learn, we're doing work.
Now it's revealed that we're doing work
with the military in the US
to try and understand that kind of thing.
And I'll always tell you and the public
when I don't know something, I'm not gonna extrapolate.
But what do I do?
I base my exercise on the scientific literature,
which has shown that maintaining muscle mass
is very important for a number of reasons.
The two main ones are,
you wanna maintain your hormone levels.
I'm an older male losing my testosterone
and muscle mass over time.
And by exercising, I will maintain that and have.
In fact, I probably haven't had a body like this
since I was 20.
So that's one of the benefits of having this lifestyle.
Sorry to interrupt you, we did an episode on hormones
and there are data in humans that show
that there are some males in their 80s and 90s
where their testosterone is equivalent
to the average of 25 and 30 year olds.
I can get you that information.
It is really impressive studies.
Unfortunately, they didn't include a lot of information
about the lifestyle factors, et cetera.
But this idea that testosterone goes down with age,
it might be the trend
but it's not necessarily a prerequisite.
Right, I believe in naturally increasing
and maintaining these hormone levels.
And I've been measuring them for a long time.
And I could see for me,
my testosterone levels were steadily,
levels were going down.
And then you got tenure and they went back up again.
No, I actually became complacent and it was the worst.
Actually, my age changed in the wrong direction after that
because I was relaxed and not worried about the future.
But then I got serious.
And I actually, according to the inside tracker algorithm,
got my age down from 58 to 31 in a matter of months.
That was a big drop.
And I've been getting steadily younger
over the last 10 years,
according to that measurement, the blood tests.
What about estrogen?
Because women are different in the sense that they do,
the number of eggs and the ovaries change over time, right?
Do you think that they can maintain estrogen levels
in over longer periods of time
using some of these same protocols?
Well, yeah, I get into trouble from a certain university
when I talk about this too much.
About estrogen?
Just about fertility and long story.
I don't want to get too much into the anecdotes,
but I'll tell you the science,
which is that if you take a mouse
and put it on fasting or caloric restriction
for up until the point where it should be infertile,
so that's about it at a year of age,
a mouse gets infertile, a female mouse.
Due to fasting or due to simply to aging?
Due to aging, due to aging.
The fasting, it's not an extreme fast,
it's just less calories.
Then you put them back on a regular food
and they become fertile again
for many, many months afterwards.
So the effect on slowing down aging
is also on the reproductive system.
Interesting.
And so I wouldn't say to any woman,
I wouldn't think that they should become super skinny
to try and preserve fertility.
That's not what I'm saying.
But these pathways that we work on,
these sirtuins, are known to delay infertility
in female animals.
Case in point, I'm one of the lead authors on a paper
where we used NMN.
Remember, this is the gas, the fuel,
the petrol for the sirtuins.
We gave old mice, one group of mice was 16 months old.
Remember, they came infertile at 12,
gave them NMN, and I think it was only six weeks later,
they had offspring.
They became fertile again,
which goes against biology, a textbook biology,
which is that female mammals run out of eggs.
Turns out that's not true.
You can rejuvenate the female reproductive system
and even get them to come out of mouse support,
as we call it.
So that's a whole new paradigm in biology as well.
That's super interesting.
Sorry to interrupt you,
but I'm reminded of a set of studies that were done
by your former colleagues, because they're no longer there,
David Hubel and Torrance Wiesel,
my scientific great-grandparents, won the Nobel Prize
for discovering what are called critical periods,
this phase of early development
when the brain is extremely plastic.
And a big part of their work was to show
that after a certain point,
the critical period shuts down,
essentially the brain can't change or not nearly as much.
And then people came along later
and showed that you could open up
these critical periods again, but very briefly,
and it takes a very specific stimulus, essentially,
high degrees of focus, et cetera.
However, there's a well-known phenomenon in this literature
where if you take an animal, and to some degree,
this has been shown in humans as well,
and you let them pass through the critical period,
but then you essentially sensory deprive them.
You take away experience, you close both eyes.
You essentially reopen the critical period.
So it seems like, and I couldn't help but mention this,
that there's this parallel between what we're talking about
here with fertility and neuroplasticity,
where, yes, there's a timer where certain things
are available to the organism early in life,
and then they tend to taper off.
It's not an open and shut, but they taper off.
But then a deprivation can actually reactivate
the availability of that process.
Forgive me, I just couldn't help but mention it,
but to me, both of those things are associated with youth,
fertility and neuroplasticity.
And so I think that it'd be so interesting,
I'd love to collaborate with you on this
to explore how neuroplasticity might actually be regulated
by these things like the sirtuins.
Right, and the sirtuins do control memory
in neurons as well.
So what I think is really interesting is that
what we're learning from the research is that
from work that you and your colleagues have done
and in my lab as well,
is that the body has remarkable powers of healing
and recovering from illness and injury.
And what we once thought was a one-way street
and you just can't repair,
you can't get over these diseases,
you can reset the system.
And the body can really get rejuvenated
in ways that in the future will wonder
why didn't we work on this earlier?
The future of humanity is more like
us walking around like Deadpool.
We'll probably be cleaner and we won't smell as badly,
but Deadpool, if you don't know,
can get injured and just recover.
It's very hard to injure this guy.
And we're gonna be the same.
There are many species, you cut off the limb,
the limb grows back.
Salamanders, yeah.
We are now learning how to tap into that system.
And in part, what we're doing is reversing the age
of those cells and telling them
how to read the genes correctly again,
reversing the age of that epigenome.
And when you do that, the cells,
the brain, for instance, the skin,
we did the optic nerve.
Now let's talk about those results for a second.
Then I want to make sure that we return
to some of these behavioral protocols.
You had this amazing paper at the end of last year,
cover article, full article in Nature,
showing that essentially a small menu
of transcription factors,
which control gene expression, et cetera,
could essentially reverse the age of neurons in the eye
and rescue those cells against damage,
essentially allow blind mice to see again
and offset degeneration of these retinal cells.
Incredible paper and such a boon to the field.
Where does that stand now
in terms of human clinical trials?
I mean, what are you envisioning
in terms of the trajectory of those data
from mice into humans someday?
Right, well, to get to the point immediately,
we're going to be testing the treatment on monkeys,
just for safety reasons.
And then the first patient should be done
sometime in 2022, early 2023,
and we're going to try to recover blindness.
This involves making an injection
of a virus into the eye, right?
Right now, there's no way that I am aware of
to manipulate these transcription factors
through a pill or some other.
That's what we're working on in my lab at Harvard right now.
So it will be-
Pill-based modulation of transcription factors.
It will be a proper pill
and the whole body gets rejuvenated by 20 years.
That's what we're aiming for.
Now we do it with gene therapy in the eye and other places.
So in the eye, yes, it's single injection.
The genes go into the retina
and we can turn it on with a drug called doxycycline.
And we do that in the mice for four to eight weeks.
Then the eye gets younger.
We can measure that because we can measure the clock.
And then the vision comes back in those mice.
And I don't see any reason why it shouldn't work in people
because it's the same structures and mechanisms
that are on in the human as well.
Now these-
And it's one injection.
As you mentioned, injections into the eye,
obviously nobody should do this
outside of an ophthalmology clinic.
And they're definitely by an ophthalmologist.
But the injections into the eye are painless
if done correctly by the right person.
It sounds dreadful, but it's actually,
I've seen it done hundreds of times.
I've done it thousands of times,
and it's not to myself, but to other creatures.
And there's a way of doing this
that's completely painless to the person.
Oh, there are a few.
It's a tiny, tiny needle too.
But the great thing about this
is that it's a one-time treatment.
Those genes go into the back of the eye
and stay there forever.
And you can just turn them on whenever you want.
So what we've found is you can turn them on in the mice,
they get their vision back,
and then you turn it off again.
And so far, many months out,
the benefit has remained.
But if it does decline,
we'll just turn it back on and reset the system,
rinse and repeat.
So one day, what's exciting
is that we could potentially do this
across the entire body
and just take this antibiotic every five years
and go back time and time again.
In thinking about the body
and what's going on under the hood,
I'm amazed still that there isn't
a simple, affordable technology
that would allow me to just look into my body
and see whether or not there are any tumors growing anywhere.
I mean, it's not that hard to look into the body.
I mean, that the technology exists.
Why hasn't anybody created an at-home
or pseudo at-home solution,
like a clinic where you can go and pay 50 bucks or 100 bucks
and see if you have any tumors growing in your body?
Yeah, it's still expensive.
You can get your doctor to try to get you in.
There's some companies that offer blood tests
that look at circulating DNA that'll measure it.
We're getting there.
We're still probably five to 10 years away
from being really cheap.
You can do things like a colon cancer test at home.
I think it's a hundred and something dollars.
You ship off your shit, excuse my language,
and they measure it.
And they tell you if you've got colon cancer
with high probability.
I did that during the pandemic
because I didn't want to get a colonoscopy.
Is it more accurate or as accurate as a colonoscopy?
I believe it's close to being as accurate.
The downside is that during a colonoscopy,
they can pinch off the polyps that are looking dangerous,
whereas this obviously isn't that.
But it's certainly easier to do.
And my father, who's Australian,
tells me that it's free for Australians.
They get this test routinely.
Interesting.
I want to return to the topic that I took us away from,
so I apologize, which is behavioral protocols.
Do you regularly do the cold shower thing,
ice baths, cold water swims?
Are you into that whole biz?
Well, you do know that I've done it at least once
because we did it together.
That's right.
Not the same bath, just to be very clear.
Same sauna, different ice baths.
The idea of Sinclair and Huberman
taking an ice bath together is,
it might warm some people's hearts,
but just to be very clear,
same ice bath, different times.
Yeah.
Thank you for clarifying.
I don't do them regularly.
I do try to sleep cool.
I sleep better anyway.
I try to dress without a lot of warm clothes.
I'm here in a t-shirt and it's middle of summer,
but in winter, I'll try to wear a t-shirt too.
So you're challenging your system to thermoregulate.
Right, right.
I've got this hypothesis with Ray Cronus.
We published what's called the metabolic winter hypothesis,
which is, tens of thousands of years ago,
we were either hungry or cold or both.
And we rarely experienced that now.
And so we try to give ourselves the metabolic winter.
And part of the problem, I think,
with the obesity epidemic is that we're never cold.
And cold, when you're cold, you have to burn energy.
It may be only slightly.
But over the whole night, if you're a little bit cool,
you'll actually expend more energy.
So I try to do that.
But I'm not a big fan of cold showers.
The sauna, I don't have access to my gym as much as I did.
But I do wanna get back into it.
I used to do it regularly with my son
and I posted on Instagram once
that he could stay in there for 15 minutes
and I could only stay in for about three.
Anyway, long story short,
I try to compensate with changes in my diet and exercise
until I get back into it.
You reminded me of something that I meant to ask earlier,
that obesity reduces NAD levels and accelerates aging.
How?
I mean, okay, so again, this is the scientist in us.
So someone's carrying a lot of excess adipose tissues,
subcutaneous and visceral fat.
But why should that reduce NAD in any ways
that are independent of effects on glucose and insulin?
Is there something direct about white adipose tissue?
And the reason I ask this
is not simply to dig into mechanism alone,
but I think there are really interesting data now
that fat actually gets neural innervation.
I mean, it's not just stored fuel.
It's stored fuel that's acting as an endocrine organ,
essentially.
So yeah, why would being fat make people age faster?
Yeah, that's a question that is so obvious,
but so few people ask it.
That's what makes you a good scientist.
And so that we don't know,
but I'll give you my best answer,
which is that obesity comes along with a lot of problems
that include a lot of senescent cells in fat.
If you stain old fat for senescent cells, it lights up.
And when you kill off those cells,
at least in mice and maybe in humans,
it looks like the fat is less toxic to the body
because those senescent cells in the fat
are secreting these inflammatory molecules
that will accelerate aging as we now know.
You talk about the sirtuins and NAD.
So if we just look philosophically at why this would be,
the sirtuins only like to come on or get activated
when the body is under adversity.
And if a cell is surrounded by fat or contains a lot of fat,
it's going to think times are good,
doesn't need to switch on.
So that's the evolutionary argument.
Mechanistically, we don't know,
but it could have something to do
with the response to glucose,
which then responds to the sirtuin gene.
But that hasn't been worked out very well.
And is there any evidence
that leptin, this hormone from fat,
can actually interact with the sirtuin pathway?
I don't recall seeing that.
Maybe I could do a sabbatical in your lab
and that'd be a fun one.
Definitely.
Because leptin during development
is what triggers the permission
for the hypothalamus to enter puberty, right?
Yes.
This is why kids that eat a lot
when they're young and get overweight
will also start to undergo puberty more quickly,
although they have reproductive issues later.
Well, yeah, we should study the hypothalamus together
because the hypothalamus can control the aging of the body.
The most interesting part of the brain.
For sure.
Yeah, absolutely.
If you turn on the SIRT1 gene,
the sirtuin gene that we work on in the hypothalamus,
it actually will extend lifespan.
Also, it's been shown by Dongxin Cai
at Albert Einstein College of Medicine
that if you inhibit inflammation
in the hypothalamus in a mouse,
it will increase or maintain the expression
of what's called GnRH,
which is the hormone that he found actually controls
longevity in the mouse in part.
And so keeping inflammation down in the hypothalamus
is sufficient to extend the lifespan of animals.
And I reviewed that paper for Nature about seven years ago.
And that was the first demonstration
that the hypothalamus is one of the leading regulators
of the body's age.
I find this fascinating.
GnRH, for those of you that don't know,
actually comes from neurons in the hypothalamus
that then literally reach down into the pituitary
and trigger the release of all the things
that control fertility,
luteinizing hormone, follicle stimulating hormone, et cetera.
It's such a powerful set of neurons,
and it's never really been clear
what at a behavioral level triggers the release of GnRH.
There's all the stories about pheromones
and timers and puberty, et cetera,
but environmental conditions and dietary conditions
and behaviors that can control GnRH release,
I think is an incredible area for exploration.
I'd love to do that sabbatical, by the way.
I have a couple seemingly random questions,
but I can't help but ask because one thing I like to do
is forage the internet for practices
that at least more than a few people are doing
and then wonder whether or not there's any basis for it.
You mentioned methylation as a detrimental process,
the way it disrupts the epigenome,
the CD reader, so to speak.
There are people out there who are ingesting methylene blue.
And when I was a kid,
I used methylene blue to clean my fish tank.
And I love fish tanks.
I know you're into aquaria also.
A different podcast episode, talk about aquaria,
but why in the world would people ingest methylene blue?
Meaning, is their logic correct
and or is that a dangerous practice?
I'm not sure I'd want to ingest methylene blue.
Sounds like a bad thing to do.
It stains your body.
You've seen these people turn blue.
Yeah, there was someone in my lab as a postdoc
was using it to study a completely different process
related to the blood brain barrier
and used to inject into animals and they would turn blue.
But then again, people ingest colloid silver.
You know, they'll put in there.
There's this, please, people don't do this.
Or if you do, just don't tell me because I won't like it.
They, people put it in their eyes
and some people actually stain their skin.
They actually become kind of a,
this silver, purple, brown color if they do it excessively.
I mean, there's a lot of crazy stuff out there,
but what do you think they're thinking
with this methylene blue thing
or should we just get them to a good psychiatrist?
I don't know for sure.
I think methylene blue was found to extend the lifespan
of some lower organism and that's where it came from.
My recollection with the-
This is on lower organisms.
Yes, smaller organisms.
I think, doesn't, do you remember, Andrew,
does it interrupt or interfere with mitochondrial activity
and that's why we're doing it.
Yeah, we need to look this up and post it.
We'll get to the bottom of this.
But those methyls, let's talk about those.
Those methyls have to be placed
on the right part of the genome.
They get attached to the right genes and the wrong genes.
And if you have a lot of methylation,
it's going to mess up the epigenome.
Smoking will do that, lack of exercise, all that good stuff.
So what you actually want to do is you want to measure it
and make sure what you're doing with your body is working.
How do you know that if you do this
or that is actually helping?
And so you can test your age.
I could take a swab from your mouth
and tell you how old you are biologically,
and then we could work on trying to bring that down.
And actually, there are anecdotes now
that people are reversing their age by a decade or more
just by doing some of the things that we've talked about
and some other cutting-edge stuff
that I'm going to write about.
But yeah, but you have to measure stuff.
I didn't want to forget to bring that up.
I'm measuring stuff all the time.
I have blood tests like you.
I've got this monitor that's stuck to my chest right now
that's measuring myself 1,000 times a second.
And I measure my biological age.
What's it measuring 1,000 times a second?
A huge host of things?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So this little device is stuck here,
and it's for two weeks.
You just recharge it or send it back and get a new one.
It's got body temperature movement, heart rate variability.
It's an FDA-approved device.
It's not a toy.
It's not one of these recreational things.
It also listens to my voice.
Eventually, it'll tell me if I need a psychiatrist
or if I'm depressed.
It will tell me how I sleep, obviously.
But when you put all that data together
and it's individualized and anonymized,
it can now tell my doctor in real time
if I've got a cold that needs an antibiotic
or it's just a virus,
if I am suffering from COVID-19,
or even if I'm going to have a heart attack next week.
And so these little devices
are going to be with us all the time
instead of going to your doctor once a year,
which is ludicrous.
I have to ask you about X-rays
because every time I go through the scanner at the airport,
I think Sinclair would never do this.
And the argument I heard you give about this before
was a really excellent one,
which is that it's a low level amount of radiation
going through at the airport,
but the argument is always,
well, it's just as much as on the plane.
And your argument, your counterargument, I should say,
was, well, then why would I want to do both, right?
So when you go to the airport,
assuming you're not running late
and you have to go through the standard line,
what do you say to them?
Do you say, I'm David Sinclair,
and then they shuttle you to your own line?
What do you say?
You do say, I don't like this thing.
Do you have to give them a reason?
No, you don't.
You can say, I don't want this,
and they'll get annoyed
because it's hard for them to pat you down,
but you get a pat down and you're done.
As long as you're not in a hurry, it's fine.
If you want to pay for the TSA Pre in America
or the way to get around those scanners, you can do that.
So I travel a lot, so it's worth it anyway.
But I just go through the metal detector.
I don't get scanned.
And the metal detector doesn't have the same problem.
And what about x-rays at the dentist?
Yeah.
Well, you know, one x-ray is not going to kill you.
Two is not going to kill you.
But I'd rather- Three will kill you.
No, I'm just kidding.
I try to limit it because it's cumulative.
And I went for six years without having a dental x-ray.
And then my last visit, I just gave up.
I was tired of arguing with my dentist.
So they gave me one,
but they've got lead coats on
and they put lead all over your body.
That's telling you something right there.
And funnily enough, my teeth hadn't changed.
Now, you could balance that by saying,
well, one x-ray, two x-rays, three x-rays
is worth it if I have cavities.
And that's true.
You want to know what's in there.
But doing it regularly, for me,
I don't think was worth it
because my teeth were in perfect health
and have always been.
Don't have any cavities.
Didn't have braces.
They're fine.
Don't stop scanning me.
I mean, I know you have to pay for the machine,
but do I have a choice?
Yes.
So stop pressuring me.
You know, who shared your sentiments about x-rays
and the dentist in general,
my apologies to the dentists out there,
was the great physicist, Richard Feynman.
This is a story about him
that's not especially well-known,
but he had very serious health concerns about x-rays
because he understood the physics
and he understood enough biology
that he was actually quite vocal
about his dislike of dental technology and its dangers.
And he talked about some of that.
People can find that on the internet if they like.
Speaking of people who are like Feynman,
who've been engaged in public discourse about science,
one of the things that I appreciate about you,
in fact, the way that you and I
initially came to know one another
is through your public health education efforts.
So obviously we're doing this podcast.
You've done the Joe Rogan podcast, Lex Friedman's podcast.
Excuse me, Lex, I'm still adjusting that.
Lex Friedman podcast and many other podcasts.
You've written an amazing book.
What are you thinking these days
in terms of what the world needs
in terms of education from scientists,
education from MDs, education in general
as it relates to these things?
Because I think if nothing else,
2020 revealed to us that there's a gap.
There's a gap in understanding
and that the scientists too are guilty
of not knowing what to do with all the information
that's out there on PubMed or elsewhere.
Just what are you thinking for yourself?
And in general, I'd like to just know
what do you think the world needs there?
Maybe we can recruit some more public educators.
Yeah, well, we've gone from a time
when you and I were in college and young professors
where the only way to get our voice out to the public
was either through a newspaper
or a very short radio interview,
which for me was extremely frustrating
because particularly the newspapers and my topic
every time was twisted into something
that was not just embarrassing,
but Harvard University used to bring me into the back office
and slap my wrist. Frankenstein.
How did you say such a thing?
We're all gonna live 200, I didn't say that.
So we're now also in a world
where we're overwhelmed with information
and most of it is wrong
and anyone can pretend to be an expert.
So we've gone from early days to now, the future,
and we're experiencing it right now
thanks to guys like you, people like you,
is that the experts, some experts,
a small number who are brilliant and good communicators
are talking directly to the public.
This has never been able to be possible
until this time right now.
So another five years from now, and certainly by 10 years,
I would hope that there are trusted sources of information
of people who cannot just communicate the ideas directly,
but are able to talk about things that are going on
that aren't even published yet to say,
here's what's really going on
and this is what the future looks like.
But this is somebody like yourself
who spent their whole life studying a particular topic
and knows what they're talking about.
And this is also something
that I think most people don't know,
that we scientists, if we tell a lie, we burst into flames.
We absolutely cannot tell something that's untrue
and to the best of our knowledge, we say it as it is
because if we don't, we're beaten up
or we kicked out of the university.
So the people who survived to our age,
and I'm a little older than you,
so I've survived a bit longer.
But a lot younger inside.
No, but we have to measure you with my stroke test.
I probably need a little help, but hopefully not too much.
We'll measure that and we'll work on your eating.
But this is really, really important
is that finally people like you
are allowed by our universities to talk to the public.
I used to do it with a real threat,
to my survival.
People would look at me,
oh, he's a salesman, he's promoting this and that.
It was seen as a real negative.
But finally, I think we're in a world
where it's not negative anymore.
And the pandemic showed that we needed voices of reason,
voices of fact that you could trust.
And you can see the popularity of your podcast
shows that the public are desperate for facts
that they can trust
because they don't know what to believe anymore.
Well, I am being completely honest when I say this
that I followed your lead.
I saw you on the Joe Rogan podcast and my jaw dropped.
I was like, this is amazing.
Because he had other good scientists on before,
but your tenured professor, Harvard genetics,
department of genetics.
And for those of you who don't know,
there's Harvard and of course Harvard Medical School,
and they're both excellent, of course,
but these are the top, top tiers of academia.
And I certainly understand what it takes
to get there and survive there
and to thrive there.
It's like a game of pinball.
You never win.
You just get to, if you're doing really well,
you get to keep playing.
That's the truth in academia.
And if you're not, you stop playing basically.
But when I saw you explain what you were doing
in a way that was accessible to people
and also talking about possible protocols
that they might explore for themselves
to see if those were right for them,
I was just dazzled and excited.
And I made every effort to get in contact with you
and the rest is history.
But I think what's really exciting to me these days
is because of 2020 and everything that's happened
and it continues to happen, there's a thirst for knowledge.
There's also this direct to the public route
that you mentioned.
And I think there's also an openness,
I'd love your thoughts on this,
but it seems to me that there's an openness
from the general public about health practices,
that there are actually things that people can do
to control their stress level, to control their sleep,
to control their cholesterol,
if that's what they need to do, maybe they don't,
and to even control their lifespan,
which I think is remarkable.
And I know I speak on behalf of so many people
when I just, I want to say thank you.
You've truly changed the course of my life.
I would not be sitting here doing this
were it not for your example.
And I always say, Sinclair, many people have written books,
many academics have written books as you have,
but in terms of doing podcasts
and really getting out there with your message
in a way that I have to assume raised your cortisol level
and heart rate just a little bit,
but you did it nonetheless.
You know, you were truly first man in
and that deserves a nod
and I have a great debt of gratitude to you for that.
So thank you so much.
Thanks, Andrew, you've become a good friend
and I'm super proud of what you've done
and what you, I know what you will do.
So in addition to your book
and your presence on social media,
Instagram and Twitter, and appearances on podcasts,
recently I've noticed that you've opened up
a sort of an email slash website that people can ask,
access, excuse me, to get some information
about their own health and rates of aging.
Tell us about that and what's being measured
and what is this test that you've been working on,
secretly and now soon not so secretly?
Yeah, well, what I want is a credit score for the body
to make it easy for people to follow their health.
And there is a number,
there's a biological age that you can measure.
Unfortunately, the test is many hundreds of dollars
right now, but in my lab,
we've been able to bring that down a lot.
And so I want to democratize this test
so that everybody has access to a score for their health
that can predict not just their future health
and time of death, but to change it.
And I'm building a system that will point people
in the right direction and give them discounts
for certain things that will improve
not just their health now,
but 10, 20, 30 years into the future.
And we can measure that and very cheaply keep measuring it
to know that you're on the right track.
Because if you don't measure something,
you can't optimize it.
And so this is the biological age test.
We've developed it.
It's a simple mouth swab.
We're rolling it out.
We're building the system right now.
And there is a signup sheet
because a lot of people want to get in line.
Go to drsinclair.com.
You can get on that and you'll be one of the first people
in the world to get this test and see what we're doing.
Oh, fantastic.
Will people be celebrating their biological age birthdays?
In other words, if I'm minus, like if I could imagine,
so I'm 45 right now, soon to be 46.
But if I were to be so lucky
is to get my biological age to 35 within 12 months,
maybe can help me do that.
Do I get to celebrate a negative birthday?
Absolutely.
And my plan is that those people
who take their age back a year or more,
we think we can go back 20 years eventually,
they'll get a birthday card from me
and it's a negative birthday card.
I love it.
And probably very little actual birthday cake
being ingested, but who cares?
Because you're living that much longer.
Well, it's full of stevia, that'll be fine.
And thank you for talking to us today.
I realized I took us down deep into the guts of mechanism
and as well, talking about global protocols,
everything from what one can do and take if they choose,
that's right for them,
to how to think about this whole process
that we talk about when we talk about lifespan,
as always incredibly illuminating.
Thank you, David.
Thanks, Andrew.
Thank you for joining me for my conversation
with Dr. David Sinclair.
If you're enjoying and or learning from this podcast,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
In addition, please subscribe on Apple and or Spotify
and on YouTube, you can leave us comments
and you can leave us suggestions for future podcast guests
that you would like us to feature.
In addition on Apple,
you can leave us up to a five-star review
and you can leave us a comment.
Please also check out the sponsors mentioned
at the beginning of this episode.
That's the best way to support this podcast.
Also, I teach science and science-related tools
on Instagram, it's Huberman Lab on Instagram.
I also have a Twitter, which is also Huberman Lab.
So be sure to check those out.
A lot of the material covers things similar to the podcast,
but oftentimes I'll cover unique material
not featured at all on the podcast.
So that's Huberman Lab on Instagram and on Twitter.
In addition, we have a Patreon,
it's patreon.com slash Andrew Huberman,
and there you can support the podcast
at any level that you like.
Today and in many other previous episodes
of the Huberman Lab podcast, we discuss supplements.
While supplements aren't necessary or right for everybody,
many people derive tremendous benefit from supplements.
For that reason, we've partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E,
because Thorne supplements are the absolute highest quality
and the absolute highest precision,
meaning what you see listed on the bottle
is what's actually in the bottle,
which is not the case for many supplement companies
out there.
Thorne is one of the partners of the Mayo Clinic
and all the major sports teams,
and so they really are very trusted,
very highest quality.
If you want to see the supplements that I personally take,
you can go to thorne.com slash the letter U slash Huberman,
and there you'll see the supplements that I take.
You can get 20% off any of those supplements,
and if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site
through that portal, you'll also get 20% off
any of the other supplements that Thorne makes.
So again, it's thorne.com slash the letter U slash Huberman
to get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes.
Also take note that the Lifespan podcast
featuring Dr. David Sinclair as a host
launches Wednesday, January 5th.
You can find the first episode here
on the Huberman Lab podcast channel.
They also have their own independent channel.
You can find the link to that channel in the show notes,
so please go there, subscribe on YouTube,
also on Apple and Spotify.
I've seen these episodes.
They are phenomenal,
and you're going to learn a tremendous amount about aging
and how to slow and reverse aging
from the world expert himself, Dr. David Sinclair.
And last, but certainly not least,
thank you for your interest in science.